Title: Creating Robust and Fair Graph Structures for Connectivity and Clustering

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.20897v1

Published Time: Thu, 21 May 2026 00:56:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 168

Markdown Content:
# Creating Robust and Fair Graph Structures for Connectivity and Clustering 

by 

# KUSHAGRA CHATTERJEE 

A0243436H 

A THESIS SUBMITTED FOR THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 

in 

COMPUTER SCIENCE 

to the 

GRADUATE DIVISION 

of the 

NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF SINGAPORE 

2025 Advisor: Dr. Diptarka Chakraborty Examiner 1: Dr. Chang Yi-Jun Examiner 2: Dr. Chen Yu 

> arXiv:2605.20897v1 [cs.DS] 20 May 2026

# Acknowledgement 

I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my PhD advisor, Prof. Diptarka Chakraborty ,for his constant guidance, encouragement, and patience throughout my doctoral studies. I have been extremely fortunate to have an advisor who guided me through every aspect of the research process, including how to read research papers critically, how to identify and approach meaningful research problems, how to develop and analyze solutions rigorously, and how to write and present research clearly and effectively. His insights, rigor, and exceptionally high standards have shaped not only this thesis but also my overall development as a researcher. I am truly grateful to have had him as my advisor. I am sincerely thankful to my collaborators Prof. Debarati Das , Tien-Long Nguyen ,

Romina Nobahari , and Keerti Choudhary for their invaluable intellectual contributions. Work-ing with them has been a rewarding experience marked by numerous insightful discussions and scrutiny of ideas. They provided critical feedback while solving problems, helped identify mistakes in my solutions, and consistently encouraged me to complete the writing—especially during in-tense periods near submission deadlines. Without their support, persistence, and collaboration, completing this thesis would not have been possible. I would also like to thank Prof. Prajakta Nimbhorkar , with whom I collaborated during different stages of my PhD. Beyond our academic interactions, she has been a consistent source of encouragement and support throughout my doctoral journey. Her thoughtful advice and reassur-ing presence were invaluable during challenging periods, and I am grateful for her generosity and kindness. I would like to acknowledge the academic environment and research culture at my institution, which provided an intellectually stimulating and supportive setting for my doctoral work. The seminars, discussions, and interactions with faculty members and peers contributed significantly to my growth as a researcher. In particular, I would like to mention Prof. Yi-jun Chang , whose interactions and discussions helped me substantially improve my research capabilities. In addition, as part of the Graduate Assistantship Programme (GAP) requirements mandated by the university, I had the opportunity to serve as a teaching assistant for the courses CS2040S, CS5230, and CS4234 under the supervision of Prof. Seth Gilbert , Prof. Arnab Bhattacharyya , and my advisor, 

Prof. Diptarka Chakraborty . This teaching experience was highly enriching and allowed me to deepen my understanding of fundamental concepts while significantly improving my communication and presentation skills as a researcher. Finally, and most importantly, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my parents and my grandmother for their constant emotional support, unconditional love, patience, and encouragement throughout these years. Their unwavering belief in me and their sacrifices have been a continual source of strength and motivation during my PhD journey. I also wish to acknowledge my personal faith, and I am grateful for the strength and guidance I draw from my belief in Ma Durga. 1Representative Papers 

This thesis includes contributions from the following set of papers: Chakraborty, D., Chatterjee, K. , & Choudhary, K. Pairwise Reachability Oracle and Preserver under Failures. ICALP 2022 [CCC22]. Chakraborty, D., Chatterjee, K. , Das, D., Nguyen, T. L., & Nobahari, R. Towards Fair Repre-sentation: Clustering and Consensus COLT 2025 [CCD +25]. Chakraborty, D., Chatterjee, K. , Das, D., & Nguyen, T. L. Generalizing Fair Clustering to Multiple Groups: Algorithms and Applications AAAI 2026 (Oral Presentation) [CCD +26b]. Chakraborty, D., Chatterjee, K. , Das, D., & Nguyen, T. L. A Generic Framework for Fair Con-sensus Clustering in Streams AAMAS 2026 [CCD +26a]. 2Abstract 

Graph algorithms are fundamental to large-scale applications such as navigation systems including Google Maps, Apple Maps, and Waze. Two central challenges in these systems are robustness to failures and fairness in clustering outcomes. This thesis addresses both challenges by developing new algorithmic techniques for (i) fault-tolerant graph structures and (ii) fair clustering, unifying them under the broader goal of designing large-scale applications that are efficient, resilient, and socially responsible. In the first part of the thesis, we study fault-tolerant reachability preservers. Given a directed graph G = ( V, E ) on n vertices and a set of pairs P ⊆ V × V , a reachability preserver is a sparse subgraph that preserves the existence of paths between all pairs in P even after k failures for some integer parameter k. We provide the first non-trivial constructions of dual fault-tolerant pairwise reachability preservers, resilient to two edge or vertex failures. In particular, we present a construction of size O(n4/3|P| 1/3), significantly improving upon prior work that was restricted to the single-fault setting. In the second part of the thesis, we investigate the design of clustering algorithms that are not only representative of the underlying data but also fair with respect to sensitive attributes. Classical clustering methods often fail to provide proportional representation for marginalized groups, thereby amplifying biases present in the data. To address this issue, we study fair variants of clustering problems, where each cluster must approximately reflect the global distribution of protected groups. Our first contribution in this direction is the study of fair consensus clustering for two groups, for which we provide the first constant-factor approximation algorithms that integrate fairness into con-sensus clustering tasks. To achieve this, we introduce a new framework called closest fair clustering, and show that the problem becomes NP-hard when the two groups are of unequal size. We then generalize closest fair clustering to arbitrary numbers of groups and develop near-linear-time approximation algorithms that efficiently handle multi-group settings. Building on this frame-work, we extend our results to obtain improved guarantees for unweighted fair correlation clustering and provide the first approximation algorithms for weighted fair correlation clustering when the weights satisfy probability constraints, as well as for multi-group fair consensus clustering. Finally, we address the scalability of fair consensus clustering by initiating the study of fair consensus clustering in the streaming model. In this setting, input clusterings arrive sequentially, and memory is limited, making it infeasible to store all inputs. We design the first constant-factor approximation algorithm for fair consensus clustering in the streaming model, which processes the stream while storing only a logarithmic number of input clusterings. Taken together, these contributions advance the broader vision of designing graph algorithms that make large-scale applications both robust and fair. Fault-tolerant reachability preservers ensure that critical connectivity information is maintained even under multiple failures, while fair cluster-ing algorithms guarantee balanced representation across sensitive groups. By addressing the dual challenges of robustness and fairness, this thesis contributes to the foundations of building graph-based systems that are not only efficient in theory but also trustworthy, inclusive, and dependable in practice. 

3Contents 

1 Introduction 1

1.1 Our Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51.2 Related Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 1.3 Technical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 1.4 Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 

2 Reachability Preservers 33 

2.1 An (Alternate) Construction of 2-FTRS for a Single Pair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 2.2 Dual Fault-tolerant Pairwise Reachability Preserver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 

3 Closest Fair Clustering with Two Colors 40 

3.1 Creating a p-divisible clustering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40 3.1.1 Details of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 3.1.2 Approximation Guarantee for AlgoforGeneral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 3.2 Making a p-divisible clustering fair. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 3.2.1 Details of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 3.2.2 Approximation Guarantee of MakeClustersFair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 3.3 Concluding the Approximation Guarantee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 3.4 Hardness of Closest Fair Clustering Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81 3.4.1 Hardness of closest p-fair for p ≥ 3: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82 3.4.2 Hardness of closest p-fair for p = 2 : . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92 

4 Closest Fair Clustering with more than Two Colors 98 

4.1 Approximate Closest Fair Clustering for Equi-Proportion Groups . . . . . . . . . . . 98 4.1.1 Details of the Algorithm: Power-of-Two Colors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98 4.1.2 Approximation Guarantee of fairpower-of-two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101 4.1.3 Details of Algorithm: General Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 4.1.4 Approximation Guarantee of fair-equi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 4.2 Approximate Closest Fair Clustering for Arbitrary-Proportion Groups . . . . . . . . 121 4.2.1 Details of the Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122 4.2.2 Approximation Guarantee of fair-general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124 

5 Implications to Weighted Fair Correlation and Fair Consensus Clustering 128 

5.1 Implication to weighted Fair Correlation Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128 5.2 Implication to Fair Consensus Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 46 Fair Consensus Clustering in Streaming setting 133 

6.1 Details of the algorithm: algo-fair-con-stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134 6.2 Analysis of algo-fair-con-stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135 6.2.1 Approximation Guarantee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135 6.2.2 Time and Space Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 6.2.3 Proof of Main Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 

7 Open Problems 143 

7.1 Improving the Approximation Factor for Multiple Colors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143 7.2 Extending to Alternative Fairness Notions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143 7.3 Handling Overlapping Subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144 

8 Appendix (Pseudocodes) 145 

8.1 Pseudocode of the algorithm AlgoforGeneral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146 8.2 Pseudocode of the algorithm AlgoforMerge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147 8.3 Pseudocode of the algorithm AlgoforCut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148 8.4 Pseudocode of the algorithm MakeClustersFair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149 8.5 Pseudocode of the algorithm fairpower-of-two . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150 8.6 Pseudocode of the algorithm multi-gm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151 8.7 Pseudocode of the algorithm make-pdc-fair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152 8.8 Pseudocode of the algorithm create-pdc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154 8.9 Pseudocode of algo-fair-con-stream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155 Chapter 1 

# Introduction 

Modern large-scale applications such as Google Maps, Apple Maps, and Waze serve millions of users daily, providing critical services such as navigation, routing, and location-based recommendations. At their core, these systems rely heavily on graph algorithms and clustering methods to deliver fast, accurate, and personalized results. Two central challenges naturally arise in this setting: ensuring 

robustness to failures and guaranteeing fair representation . Addressing these challenges requires principled algorithmic techniques, motivating the study of both fault-tolerant graph structures and 

fair clustering . In this thesis, we pursue both directions: on the one hand, we study reachability preservers as a fundamental tool for fault-tolerant graph sparsification, and on the other hand, we study fair clustering to design clustering algorithms that are both accurate and representative. Navigation platforms such as Google Maps, Apple Maps and Waze rely on algorithms that solve shortest-path queries at scale under stringent real-time constraints. To achieve fast query response, these systems often rely on precomputation-based architectures such as Contraction Hierarchies 

[GSS +08] and Customizable Route Planning [DGP +17]. These methods are highly efficient but typically return a single “best” route, often the shortest path. In practice, however, users may seek multiple alternatives—for example, avoiding highways, toll roads, or unsafe streets. This motivates research into computing alternative routes [ADG +13]. Supporting such customizable objectives directly on the full road network is computationally prohibitive, leading to the development of algorithms that extract smaller subgraphs while preserving essential connectivity. For example, work on subgraph extraction for routing [AGH +24] and efficient subgraphs for customizable route planning [DGP +17] demonstrates that compact subgraphs enable flexible routing with reduced overhead. This need for smaller yet faithful subgraphs necessitates the broader study of graph sparsifiers .Graph sparsification is the process of approximating a large graph with a sparse subgraph that preserves certain properties of the original. Over the last few decades, multiple notions of sparsi-fication have been introduced, each tailored to a different structural or algorithmic objective. For example, graph spanners preserve approximate distances between all pairs of vertices, and have been extensively studied starting with Awerbuch [Awe83], Peleg and Schäffer [PS89], and Alon et al. [AKP +95], culminating in optimal constructions such as those of Thorup and Zwick [TZ05] and Elkin and Peleg [EP05]. A related notion, emulators , preserves approximate distances by allowing additional edges [BS07]. Another classical line of work is cut sparsifiers , which preserve the capacity of all cuts approximately, beginning with the seminal work of Benczúr and Karger [BK96]. More recently, spectral sparsifiers , introduced by Spielman and Srivastava [SS11], preserve the quadratic 1form of the Laplacian matrix, leading to powerful applications in numerical linear algebra and op-timization. Each of these sparsifiers captures a different structural aspect of the input graph, and together they form a central toolkit of modern graph algorithms. Among these sparsification primitives, one of the simplest and most natural objects is the reach-ability preserver . Given a graph G and a set of pairs P of vertices, a reachability preserver is a sparse subgraph H that preserves the existence of a path between each pair (s, t ) ∈ P if and only if one exists in G. Reachability preservers thus capture one of the most fundamental binary relations in a graph—whether a path exists between two vertices—and serve as a baseline abstraction for path-preserving sparsification. They arise naturally in applications where connectivity, rather than distance or capacity, is the key requirement. For example, in network reliability and fault-tolerant design, ensuring that communication remains possible between designated end vertices is often more important than minimizing distances. Similarly, in road networks, the ability to guarantee that certain critical routes remain present even under subgraph extraction is essential for supporting customizable routing at scale. In this thesis, we take this perspective further by studying fault-tolerant reachability preservers ,which remain valid even after the failure of edges or vertices. Fault tolerance is crucial in real-world settings where networks may be subject to disruptions due to accidents, congestion, or hardware failures. While classical sparsification notions largely assume static networks, fault-tolerant vari-ants aim to guarantee structural preservation under adversarial deletions. As such, fault-tolerant reachability preservers unify two key ideas: sparsification for efficiency and robustness for reliability. In addition to routing, clustering is another core primitive underlying the functionality of large-scale platforms like Google Maps, Apple Maps, and Waze. Clustering is used to group nearby places of interest, such as restaurants, tourist attractions, or services, and to present representative subsets to the user. From a theoretical perspective, clustering is one of the most extensively studied problems in computer science and operations research, with variants such as k-center, k-median, and k-means receiving decades of attention. In the setting of graph metrics, the distance between two vertices is given by the length of the shortest path connecting them. Clustering problems such as k-center, k-median, and k-means have been extensively studied under this formulation, where clusters are formed based on shortest-path distances in the graph. Classic results include the 2-approximation greedy algorithm for k-center by Gonzalez [Gon85], the local search framework for 

k-median by Arya et al. [AGK +04], and LP-rounding approaches for facility location and clustering by Charikar et al. [CGT +99] and Jain and Vazirani [JV01]. Another influential formulation is correlation clustering , introduced by Bansal, Blum, and Chawla [BBC02], where the input is a complete graph with similarity/dissimilarity labels, and the goal is to partition vertices to minimize disagreements. Correlation clustering has since become a central abstraction for unsupervised learning and data integration tasks, with applications rang-ing from community detection to document classification and entity resolution [CGW05; ACN08; CMS +18]. Early works established both the algorithmic and hardness foundations of the problem. Bansal et al. [BBC04] showed that correlation clustering is NP-hard even on complete unweighted graphs, and provided the first constant-factor approximation algorithms for both the minimization and maximization variants. Charikar, Guruswami, and Kumar [CGW05] subsequently developed an LP-based rounding approach that achieved a 3-approximation for the minimize-disagreement version and an O(1) -approximation for the maximize-agreement variant. This work set the stage for a long line of research on improving approximation guarantees and extending correlation clus-tering to richer settings. Ailon, Charikar, and Newman [ACN08] proposed the celebrated pivot 

2algorithm , which provided a simple and elegant randomized 2.5-approximation, establishing a new benchmark for practical and theoretical performance. Further progress was made by Chawla et al. [CMS +18], who refined LP-based techniques to obtain a 2.06 -approximation for the weighted ver-sion, which remains a milestone in correlation clustering optimization. Their work also established improved hardness of approximation, showing that under the Unique Games Conjecture (UGC), no polynomial-time algorithm can achieve an approximation factor better than 1.36 . In parallel, sev-eral works have extended correlation clustering beyond the standard offline and centralized setting. The problem has been explored in the massively parallel computation (MPC) model by Behnezhad et al. [BCM +22] and Cohen-Addad et al. [CLM +21; CLP +24], where the current state-of-the-art achieves a 1.876 -approximation in a constant number of rounds under sublinear memory. Cohen-Addad, Lattanzi, Mitrović, and Parotsidis [CLM +22] further studied the online setting, obtaining an O(log n)-competitive algorithm and initiating a new line of work in online clustering. Most recently, Cao et al. [CCL +25] obtained the current state-of-the-art 1.437 -approximation via a dynamic-programming framework combined with refined rounding analysis. A fair amount of attention has also been devoted to the weighted version of the correlation clustering problem. In weighted correlation clustering, each edge (u, v ) in the graph G is assigned two weights: a positive weight w+(u, v ) and a negative weight w−(u, v ). The objective is to partition the vertices to minimize the total negative weight within clusters, together with the total positive weight across clusters. Charikar, Guruswami, and Wirth [CGW05] presented a factor-4 approximation algorithm for weighted correlation clustering and showed that the problem is APX-hard. Subsequently, De-maine, Emanuel, Fiat, and Immorlica [DEF +06] studied the problem in general graphs, obtaining an O(log n)-approximation. They further showed that any significant improvement in this approxi-mation factor would imply improved approximations for the notoriously difficult minimum multicut problem. Later, Ailon, Charikar, and Newman [ACN08] introduced an LP-based formulation that achieves a 2.5-approximation when the edge weights satisfy probability constraints, that is, for every edge 

(u, v ),

w+(u, v ) + w−(u, v ) = 1 .

They further obtained a 2-approximation when the weights satisfy both the probability constraints and triangle inequalities, namely, for every triple (u, v, w ),

w+(u, v ) ≤ w+(u, w ) + w+(w, v ) and w−(u, v ) ≤ w−(u, w ) + w−(w, v ).

More recently, Chawla et al. [CMS +18] improved the approximation factor to 1.5 under the same probability and triangle inequality assumptions. A related and equally important problem is consensus clustering , where the goal is to aggregate multiple input clusterings into a single representative clustering [DJP +97; VRV12; BN20]. Con-sensus clustering is widely used in large-scale applications where multiple models or data sources provide conflicting partitions, such as combining outputs of different machine learning pipelines or integrating user-generated labels. The consensus clustering problem also has a myriad of applica-tions in different domains, such as gene integration in bioinformatics [FS04b; FS04a], data mining [TJP03], community detection [LF12]. The problem (both respect to median and center objective) is not only known to be NP -hard [KM86; Swa04], but also known to be APX -hard, i.e., unlikely to possess any (1 + ε)-approximation (for any ε > 0) algorithm even when there are only three input clusterings [BVD +08]. While several heuristics have been considered to generate reasonable 3solutions (e.g., [GF08; MTM +03; WLX +14]), so far, we only know of an 11 /7-approximation algo-rithm for the median objective [ACN08], and a better than 2-approximation for the center objective [DK25]. Both correlation clustering and consensus clustering are valued because they make minimal assumptions on the input and capture the need for robust clustering under noisy or heterogeneous information, a property essential for real-world platforms operating at scale. While these formulations capture structural or objective-based requirements, they do not address issues of fairness . In practical recommender systems, clustering purely by similarities or aggregating multiple clusterings can produce biased outcomes, for instance by overrepresenting certain types of businesses (e.g., large fast-food chains) while underrepresenting others (e.g., minority-owned restaurants or niche cultural attractions). This imbalance reflects a broader concern in machine learning: algorithmic decision processes often exhibit disparate impact when fairness constraints are ignored. In clustering, the pioneering work of Chierichetti et al. [CKL +17] introduced the notion of fair clustering , requiring that the representation of sensitive groups within each cluster reflect their overall proportions in the dataset. Subsequent work expanded this framework: Bera et al. [BCF +19] and Huang et al. [HJV19] developed improved algorithms for fair clustering, while Backurs et al. [BIV +19] studied scalable approaches, Chen et al. [CFL +19] introduced proportionally fair clustering, and Ahmadian et al. [AEK +20] addressed correlation clustering under fairness constraints. To the best of our knowledge, fairness has not previously been studied in either weighted correlation clustering or consensus clustering. We initiate the study of fairness in both settings. We also study the problem of fair consensus clustering in the streaming setting. Large-scale applications operate in highly dynamic environments, where data is generated continuously, and decisions must be updated in real time. These systems routinely aggregate information from mul-tiple agents or sources—such as user trajectories, local preferences, sensor data, and third-party inputs—each of which can be viewed as inducing a clustering or partition of the underlying data. Storing and repeatedly processing all such inputs in their entirety is often infeasible due to scale, latency, and memory constraints. This operational reality naturally motivates the study of space-efficient algorithms in the stream-ing model, where inputs arrive sequentially, and the algorithm must process them on the fly while retaining only a small subset or a compact sketch of the data. At the end of the stream, all down-stream computation is performed using this sketch alone. In such applications, maintaining fairness guarantees is particularly challenging: fairness constraints must be enforced without the ability to store the full input. This raises the fundamental question of whether fairness can be preserved efficiently in the streaming setting, achieving sublinear—ideally logarithmic—space per reported output while retaining strong approximation guarantees. Although multiple passes over the data stream may sometimes be permitted, single-pass algorithms are strongly preferred, as additional passes are often prohibitively expensive in real-world systems [Mut05; BBD +02]. In the commonly studied insertion-only streaming model for clustering [COP03; RVF +14; BFL +19; SSS19], data points from an underlying metric space arrive one by one, and deletions are disallowed. A central algorithmic paradigm in this setting is the construction of coresets or other succinct summaries that preserve the clustering structure, enabling approximate solutions for objectives such as k-median, k-means, and k-center with provable guarantees. Seminal work introduced merge-and-reduce frameworks that allow such summaries to be maintained using poly-logarithmic space and update time [BS80; HM04; FL11; BFL +19]. More recently, coreset construc-4tions have also been developed for clustering problems under fairness constraints [HJV19; SSS19; CDC +22; BCJ +22; XDS +24]. However, to the best of our knowledge, none of these results im-ply sublinear-space streaming algorithms with non-trivial approximation guarantees for the fair consensus clustering problem. In the context of location-based recommenders, fairness in correlation and consensus clustering is particularly important. Platforms such as Google Maps, Apple Maps, or Waze directly influence user behavior and business visibility through their recommendations. Correlation clustering natu-rally models the setting where user ratings or co-visit patterns provide noisy similarity/dissimilarity information between businesses, while consensus clustering models the integration of multiple het-erogeneous signals (e.g., customer reviews, geographic proximity, and social network influence) into a unified recommendation. Ensuring that the resulting clusters are not only structurally mean-ingful but also representative of the underlying diversity of businesses and communities is key to building trust and avoiding bias. Fair correlation and consensus clustering thus provide principled frameworks to achieve this balance, ensuring that recommendations remain inclusive, diverse, and socially responsible while maintaining algorithmic efficiency. The two themes outlined above—graph sparsification and fair clustering—may at first seem or-thogonal, but they address complementary challenges faced by large-scale systems. On one side, fault-tolerant reachability preservers ensure that critical connectivity is maintained even under fail-ures, providing the backbone of reliability for navigation and routing. On the other side, fair clustering ensures that recommendations built on graph metrics are representative and inclusive, mitigating the risk of bias and unequal visibility. Both are essential for the next generation of graph-based systems: efficiency alone is not enough without robustness, and accuracy alone is not enough without fairness. By unifying these perspectives, this thesis contributes to the theoreti-cal foundations of building systems that are not only scalable and accurate but also dependable, equitable, and socially responsible. 

# 1.1 Our Contribution 

In this section, we state our contributions. 

# Reachability Preservers 

In the context of graph sparsification, reachability preserver (or reachability subgraph ) for a directed graph G and a set P of vertex-pairs is a sparse subgraph H with as few edges as possible so that for any pair (s, t ) ∈ P there is a path from s to t in H if and only if there is such a path in G. In the standard static setting (with no failure), this object has been studied widely [CE06; Bod17; AB18]. We study these objects in the presence of edge/vertex failures. Let us formally define fault-tolerant reachability subgraph ( FTRS ) for a set of vertex-pairs. 

Definition 1.1.1 (FTRS ). Let P ⊆ V × V be any set of pairs of vertices. A subgraph H of G is said to be a k-Fault-Tolerant Reachability Subgraph of G for P, denoted as k-FTRS (G, P), if for any pair (s, t ) ∈ P and for any subset F ⊆ E of at most k edges, t is reachable from s in G \ F if and only if t is reachable from s in H \ F .For the particular case of single-source, i.e., P = {s} × V , Baswana, Choudhary, and Roditty [BCR16] provided a polynomial-time algorithm that, given any n-vertex directed graph, constructs 5an O(2 kn)-sized k-FTRS . As an immediate corollary, we get a k-FTRS of size O(2 kn|P| ) (by ap-plying the algorithm of [BCR16] to find subgraph for each source vertex in pairs of P and then taking the union of all these subgraphs). For the general setting of arbitrary pairs, the only previously known non-trivial result was for single failure [CC20], wherein the authors gave an upper bound of O(n + min( |P| √n, n p|P| )) edges. It was left open whether for dual or more failures whether keeping fewer than O(n|P| ) edges sufficient to preserve the pairwise reachability. In particular, does any n-vertex graph and a set P of vertex-pairs always admit a k-FTRS of size o(2 kn|P| )?In this work, we answer the above question affirmatively. For dual failures, we provide an upper bound of O(n4/3|P| 1/3) edges on the structure of 2-FTRS (G, P).

Theorem 1 (Upper Bound on 2-FTRS ). For any directed graph G = ( V, E ) with n vertices and a set P ⊆ V × V of vertex-pairs, there exists a 2-FTRS (G, P) having at most O(n4/3|P| 1/3) edges. Furthermore, we can find such a subgraph in polynomial time. 

Clearly, for P of size ω(√n), the above result breaks below the O(n|P| ) bound. 

# Fair Clustering 

Given a set of vertices V , clustering is defined as a partitioning of V in a metric space into clusters 

C1, . . . , C w with the goal of minimizing certain objective functions specific to the application. We call a set of clusters C = {C1, . . . , C w} a clustering. Each vertex can be viewed as an individual with certain protected attributes, which can be represented by assigning a color to each vertex. As mentioned before, Chierichetti et al [CKL +17] pioneered the concept of fair clustering , where each vertex in the dataset is colored either red or blue. The goal was to partition the data while maintaining balance in each cluster – the ratio of blue to red vertices in each cluster reflects the overall ratio in the entire set. Later, Rösner and Schmidt [RS18] studied fair clustering for multiple colors. Formally, fair clustering can be defined in the following way. 

Definition 1.1.2 (Fair clustering) . Given a set of vertices V , suppose it is divided into |χ| disjoint groups. Each group i is represented by a color ci. A clustering F = {F1, . . . , F ι} on V is said to be fair if for each cluster Fj ∈ F we have 

c1(Fj ) : · · · : c|χ|(Fj ) = c1(V ) : · · · : c|χ|(V )

where ci(S) denotes the number of vertices of color ci in S where S ⊆ V .The above notion of fairness is called proportional fairness . In this thesis, we study fairness for two types of clusterings: (i) Weighted Correlation Clustering with probability constraints and (ii )

Consensus Clustering . Let us define them. In weighted correlation clustering with probability constraints, we are given a complete undi-rected graph G = ( V, E ) in which each edge (u, v ) ∈ E is assigned two weights: a positive weight 

w+(u, v ) and a negative weight w−(u, v ), satisfying 

w+(u, v ) + w−(u, v ) = 1 .

If, for every edge (u, v ), the weights satisfy w+(u, v ), w −(u, v ) ∈ { 0, 1}, then the instance is referred to as an unweighted correlation clustering instance. 6For an arbitrary clustering C, we write u ∼C v to denote that vertices u and v belong to the same cluster under C, and u ≁C v to denote that they belong to different clusters. The cost of a clustering C is defined as 

cost( C) = X 

> u∼Cv

w−(u, v ) + X 

> u≁Cv

w+(u, v ).

The objective of weighted correlation clustering is to find a clustering that minimizes cost( C). When the clustering C is additionally required to satisfy fairness constraints, the problem is referred to as 

weighted fair correlation clustering .

γ-approximate weighted fair correlation clustering : We call a clustering F, a γ-approximate weighted fair correlation clustering if 

cost( F) ≤ γ cost( F∗

> corr

)

here F∗ 

> corr

is an optimal weighted fair correlation clustering. For the unweighted correlation cluster-ing instance, that is, when for each edge (u, v ) we have w+(u, v ), w −(u, v ) ∈ { 0, 1}, we refer F as 

γ-approximate unweighted fair correlation clustering .To define consensus clustering, we need to define the distance between two clusterings C and C′

on a vertex set V . The distance is measured by the number of pairs (u, v ) that are together in C

but separated by C′ and the number of pairs (u, v ) that are separated by C but together in C′. More specifically, 

dist( C, C′) = {u, v } | u, v ∈ V, [u ∼C v ∧ u̸ ∼C′ v]

∨ [u̸ ∼C v ∧ u ∼C′ v]

where u ∼C v denotes whether both u and v belong to the same cluster in C or not. In Consensus clustering, we are given m clusterings C1, . . . , Cm on a vertex set V and our goal is to find a clustering C which minimizes the following objective 

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, C)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

for any integer ℓ ∈ Z+. In addition to the above, when we want the clustering to be fair, we call that problem as fair consensus clustering problem. 

β-approximate consensus clustering : We call a clustering F, β-approximate fair consensus clustering if 

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

≤ β

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F∗

> con

)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

here F∗ 

> con

is an optimal fair consensus clustering. To solve the above problems of fair correlation clustering and fair consensus clustering, we introduce a new problem called closest fair clustering . In closest fair clustering, our goal is to find a fair clustering F on V which is closest to a given clustering C. More specifically, given a clustering 

C, we call a clustering F a closest fair clustering to C if F is fair and 

dist( C, F) ≤ dist( C, F′)

7for all fair clusterings F′.

α-close fair clustering : A clustering F is called α-close fair clustering to a given clustering C

if 

dist( C, F) ≤ α dist( C, F∗C )

where F∗C is one of the closest (optimal) fair clustering to C.

Contributions for Weighted Correlation clustering and Consensus clustering: We prove that, if there exists an algorithm to find an α-close fair clustering, then we can find an (α + ρ + αρ ) -approximate weighted fair correlation clustering and an (α+2) -approximate fair consensus clustering where ρ is the state-of-the-art approximation factor for (unfair) weighted correlation clustering problem. Thus, we prove the following theorems 

Theorem 2. Suppose we have an algorithm to find an α-close fair clustering to any given unfair clustering D, then given a correlation clustering instance G , there exists an algorithm to find an 

(α + ρ + αρ ) - approximate weighted fair correlation clustering under probability constraints, where 

ρ is the state-of-the-art approximation factor for the weighted correlation clustering problem under probability constraints. 

Theorem 3. Suppose we have an algorithm to find an α-close fair clustering to any given unfair clustering D, then given m input clusterings, C1, . . . , Cm , there exists an algorithm to find an 

(α + 2) -approximate fair consensus clustering. 

Theorems 2 and 3 establish a direct relation of weighted fair correlation clustering and fair consensus clustering with the closest fair clustering problem. In particular, any approximation guarantee for closest fair clustering can be transformed into approximation guarantees for the other two problems. Therefore, the central algorithmic challenge is to design and analyze algorithms for the closest fair clustering problem, as progress in this setting immediately yields corresponding advances for weighted fair correlation clustering and fair consensus clustering. 

Contributions for Closest fair clustering (two colors): We begin by analyzing the case where the vertex set is partitioned into two disjoint color groups, blue and red, such that the ratio of blue to red vertices in V is p : 1 . For this setting, we develop an efficient algorithm that achieves a constant-factor approximation guarantee. Specifically, our algorithm constructs a clustering that is within a factor of 17 of the optimal fair clustering with respect to the input clustering C.

Theorem 4. Let the vertex set V be partitioned into two disjoint groups, blue and red, where the ratio of blue to red vertices in V is p : 1 for some integer p > 1. Then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a 17 -close fair clustering with respect to a given input clustering C.

To complement the positive result in Theorem 4, we show a hardness result for the closest fair clustering problem. More specifically, we show that finding a closest fair clustering to given input clustering is NP-hard in the p : 1 case. 

Theorem 5. The closest fair clustering problem is NP -hard when the vertex set V is divided into two disjoint groups, blue and red, and the number of blue vertices is p times the number of red vertices, for some integer p > 1.

8Contributions for Closest fair clustering (more than two colors): We now extend our study to the multi-color setting, where the vertex set V is partitioned into |χ| ≥ 2 disjoint color groups c1, . . . , c |χ|. For a subset S ⊆ V , let ci(S) denote the number of vertices of color ci in S. The complexity of the closest fair clustering problem naturally increases with the number of groups, as fairness must be enforced simultaneously across all colors. We analyze two important cases: (i) the balanced case, where all colors appear in equal proportion, and (ii) the general case, where color proportions may be arbitrary. In the balanced case, where 

1 : 1 : · · · : 1 = c1(V ) : c2(V ) : · · · : c|χ|(V )

we design an efficient algorithm that achieves a polylogarithmic approximation guarantee. In par-ticular, our algorithm computes an O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|)-close fair clustering with respect to the input clustering C in general for any number of colors and O(|χ|1.6)-close fair clustering when the number of colors is a power of 2.

Theorem 6. Let χ be a set of colors and let V be partitioned into disjoint color classes indexed by χ, such that each color class has the same size and |χ| > 2, then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes an O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|)-close fair clustering with respect to a given input clustering C. Moreover, when |χ| is a power of two, the algorithm computes a O(|χ|1.6)-close fair clustering. 

We next consider the general case, where the ratio of group sizes is arbitrary: 

p1 : p2 : · · · : p|χ| = c1(V ) : c2(V ) : · · · : c|χ|(V ).

Here, we interpret p1 : p2 : · · · : p|χ| as the ratio c1(V ) : c2(V ) : · · · : c|χ|(V ) reduced to its simplest form, so that each pi is an integer. For this setting, we provide a general algorithm that computes an O(|χ|3.81 )-close fair clustering with respect to the input clustering C.

Theorem 7. There is a polynomial time algorithm that, given an arbitrary clustering C over a vertex set V where each vertex v ∈ V has a color in χ = {c1, . . . , c k}, finds an O(|χ|3.81 )-close fair clustering to the clustering C.

Corollaries for unweighted fair correlation clustering: Let us now state the corollaries we obtain for the unweighted fair correlation clustering problem. A series of works [CGW05; ACN08; CMS +18; CLM +21; CLP +24; CLM +22; CCL +25] have established constant-factor approximation algorithms for the standard unweighted correlation clus-tering problem, i.e., in the setting where no fairness constraints are imposed on the cluster-ing. Recall in the unweighted correlation clustering problem, for each edge (u, v ) we have 

w+(u, v ), w −(u, v ) ∈ { 0, 1}. These results represent significant progress toward understanding the approximability of unweighted correlation clustering. The current best-known approximation guar-antee is due to Cao et al. [CCL +25], who achieved an approximation factor of 1.437 through a refined dynamic programming framework and combinatorial analysis. 

Theorem 8 ([CCL +25]) . For the standard unweighted correlation clustering problem (without fair-ness constraints), there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a 1.437 -approximate solu-tion. 

9By combining Theorem 2 with Theorem 6 and Theorem 8, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 1. Let χ be a set of colors and let V be partitioned into color classes indexed by χ, such that |χ| ≥ 2 and the color groups are of equal size, then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes an O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|)-approximate unweighted fair correlation clustering. 

The above corollary improves the state-of-the-art approximation factor of O(|χ|2) by Ahmadian et al [AEK +20] and by Ahmadi et al [AGS +20] for the unweighted fair correlation clustering problem. By combining Theorem 2 with Theorem 7 and Theorem 8, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 2. There is a polynomial time algorithm that, given an arbitrary clustering C over a vertex set V where each vertex v ∈ V has a color in χ = {c1, . . . , c k}, finds an O(|χ|3.81 )-approximate unweighted fair correlation clustering. 

The above corollary eliminates the dependence on the M = max j∈[χ] pj that appeared in the previous O(M 2|χ|2) bound of [AEK +20; AGS +20], for unweighted fair correlation clustering where 

M can be as large as a polynomial in |V |.

Corollaries for weighted fair correlation clustering under probability constraints: Let us now state the corollaries related to weighted fair correlation clustering problem. By combining Theorem 2 with Theorem 4, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 3. If the vertex set V is partitioned into two disjoint groups, blue and red, where the ratio of blue to red vertices in V is p : 1 for some integer p > 1, then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a (17 + ρ + 17 ρ)-approximate unweighted fair correlation clustering under probability constraints, where ρ is the state-of-the-art approximation factor for the weighted correlation clustering problem under probability constraints. 

For the weighted correlation clustering problem under probability constraints, the state-of-the-art approximation factor is by Ailon et al [ACN08], which provides a 2.5 approximation. In addition to the probability constraints, if the weights satisfy the triangle inequality constraints, then the state-of-the-art approximation factor is by Chawla et al [CMS +18], which provides a 1.5 approximation. Recall, the triangle inequality constraint needs the weights to satisfy for every triple (u, v, w ),

w+(u, v ) ≤ w+(u, w ) + w+(w, v ) and w−(u, v ) ≤ w−(u, w ) + w−(w, v ).

Theorem 9 ([ACN08]) . For the standard weighted correlation clustering problem under probability constraints (without fairness constraints), there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a 

2.5-approximate solution. 

Theorem 10 ([CMS +18]) . For the standard weighted correlation clustering problem under both prob-ability and triangle inequality constraints (without fairness constraints), there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a 1.5-approximate solution. 

By combining Theorem 2 with Theorem 6 and Theorem 9, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 4. Let χ be a set of colors and let V be partitioned into disjoint color classes indexed by χ, such that |χ| ≥ 2 and the color groups are of equal size, then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes an O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|)-approximate weighted fair correlation clustering under probability constraints. 

10 By combining Theorem 2 with Theorem 7 and Theorem 9, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 5. There is a polynomial time algorithm that, given an arbitrary clustering C over a vertex set V where each vertex v ∈ V has a color in χ = {c1, . . . , c k}, finds an O(|χ|3.81 )-approximate weighted fair correlation clustering under probability constraints. 

In addition to the probability constraints, if the weights also satisfy the triangle inequality, then Theorem 10 yields improved constant factors hidden in the O-notation of the approximation guarantees in Corollary 4 and Corollary 5. We provide the first approximation algorithms for the weighted correlation clustering problem under probability constraints. For brevity, throughout the remainder of this thesis, we refer to weighted correlation clustering with probability constraints simply as weighted correlation clustering .

Corollaries for fair consensus clustering: Similarly, we can state the corollaries for the fair consensus clustering problem. The following corollaries establish the first known approximation guarantees for the fair consensus clustering problem. By combining Theorem 3 with Theorem 4, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 6. If the vertex set V is partitioned into two disjoint groups, blue and red, where the ratio of blue to red vertices in V is p : 1 for some integer p > 1, then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a 19 -approximate fair consensus clustering. 

By combining Theorem 3 with Theorem 6, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 7. Let χ be a set of colors and let V be partitioned into disjoint color classes indexed by χ, such that |χ| ≥ 2 and the color groups are of equal size, then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes an O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|)-approximate fair consensus clustering. 

By combining Theorem 3 with Theorem 7, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 8. There is a polynomial time algorithm that, given an arbitrary clustering C over a vertex set V where each vertex v ∈ V has a color in χ = {c1, . . . , c k}, finds an O(|χ|3.81 )-approximate fair consensus clustering. 

# Fair Consensus Clustering in Streaming Setting 

We study fair consensus clustering in the following streaming model. The input consists of a sequence of triples (p, j, b ), where 

• p = ( u, v ) is an unordered pair of vertices in V ,

• j ∈ [m] identifies an input clustering Cj , and 

• b ∈ { 0, 1} indicates whether vertices u and v belong to the same cluster in Cj (b = 0 ) or to different clusters ( b = 1 ). The triples (p, j, b ) arrive in an arbitrary order. We refer to this streaming model as 

pairwise streaming model . This model is inspired by prior work on unweighted correlation clus-tering in the streaming setting, where edges and their labels arrive arbitrarily in a stream [ACG +15; BCM +23; CM23]. 11 To the best of our knowledge, there has been no prior work explicitly addressing even the standard (unfair) consensus clustering problem in the streaming setting. While it is plausible that techniques based on coresets in streaming models [RVF +14; BFL +16] could yield approximation algorithms for standard consensus clustering, no such results have been established. In contrast, we provide the first approximation algorithms for fair consensus clustering in the streaming setting. Our main result for this model is summarized in the following theorem. 

Theorem 11. Suppose there exists an approximation algorithm for fair correlation clustering with running time t1(n), and assume oracle access to an α-approximate closest fair clustering algo-rithm. Then, there exists a (α + 1 .995) -approximation algorithm for fair consensus clustering in the 

pairwise streaming model that uses O(n log m) space and has query time 

O n2 log 4 m + t1(n) log 3 m .

Corollaries for fair consensus clustering in streaming setting: The above Theorem 11 assumes oracle access to an α-approximate closest fair clustering algorithm, which we have already established in previous sections. Consequently, we obtain the following corollaries for fair consensus clustering in the pairwise streaming model .By combining Theorem 11 with Theorem 4, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 9. If the vertex set V is partitioned into two disjoint groups, blue and red, where the ratio of blue to red vertices in V is p : 1 for some integer p > 1, Then, there exists a 18 .995 -approximation algorithm for fair consensus clustering in the pairwise streaming model using O(n log m) space. 

By combining Theorem 11 with Theorem 6, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 10. Let χ be a set of colors and let V be partitioned into disjoint color classes indexed by 

χ, such that |χ| ≥ 2 and the color groups are of equal size, then, there exists a O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|)-approximation algorithm for fair consensus clustering in the pairwise streaming model using 

O(n log m) space. 

By combining Theorem 11 with Theorem 7, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 11. There is a polynomial time algorithm that, given an arbitrary clustering C over a vertex set V where each vertex v ∈ V has a color in χ = {c1, . . . , c k}, finds an O(|χ|3.81 )-approximate fair consensus clustering in the pairwise streaming model using O(n log m) space. 

# 1.2 Related Works 

In this section, we write the related works for both fault-tolerant reachability preservers and fair clustering. 

# Related Works of Reachability Preservers 

A simple version of a reachability preserver is when there is a single source vertex s, and we would like to preserve reachability from s to all other vertices. As mentioned previously, Baswana, Choudhary and Roditty [BCR16] provided an efficient construction of a k-fault-tolerant single-source reachability preserver of size O(2 kn). Further, they showed that this upper bound on the 12 size of a preserver is tight up to some constant factor. For the standard static setting (with no faulty edges), a much better bound is known. We know that even to preserve all the pairwise distances, not just reachability, there is a subgraph of size O n + min( n2/3|P| , n p|P| )  [CE06; Bod17]. Later Abboud and Bodwin [AB18] showed that for any directed graph G = ( V, E ) given a set S of source vertices and a pair-set P ⊆ S × V we can construct a pairwise reachability preserver of size 

O n + min( pn|P|| S|, (n|P| )2/3) . It is further shown that for any integer d ≥ 2 there is an infinite family of n-vertex graphs and vertex-pair sets P for which any pairwise reachability preserver must be of size Ω n2/(d+1) |P| (d−1) /d . Note, for undirected graphs, storing spanning forests is sufficient to preserve pairwise reachability information, and thus we can always get a linear size reachability preserver for undirected graphs. We would like to emphasize that all our results in this paper hold for directed graphs. By [BCR16] we immediately get an oracle of size O(2 kn) for k edge (or vertex) failures with query time O(2 kn). For just dual failures, we have an O(n) size oracle with O(1) query time due to [Cho16]. For undirected graphs, the optimal bound of O(kn ) edges for k-fault-tolerant connectivity pre-server directly follows from k-edge (vertex) connectivity certificate constructions provided by Nag-amochi and Ibaraki [NI92]. For connectivity oracle, Pˇ atraşcu and Thorup [PT07] presented a data structure of O(m) size that can handle any k edge failures in O(k log 2 n log log n) time to sub-sequently answer connectivity queries between any two vertices in O(log log n) time. For small values of k, Duan and Pettie [DP10] improved the update time of [PT07] to O(k2 log log n) by presenting a data structure of eO(m) size. For handling vertex failures, Duan and Pettie [DP17] provided a data structure of O(mk log n) size with O(k3 log 3 n) update time and O(k) query time. Other closely related problems that have been studied in the fault-tolerant model include com-puting distance preservers [DTC +08; PP13; Par15], depth-first-search tree [BCC +19], spanners [CLP +09; DK11], approximate distance preservers [BK13; PP14; BGL +16], approximate distance oracles [DP09; CLP +10], compact routing schemes [CLP +10; Che13]. 

Work done after our work. More recently, Bodwin and Le [BL25] studied the problem of online reachability preservers , where demand pairs arrive one at a time and the algorithm must irrevocably add edges to the preserver before seeing the next pair. They showed that in this setting, one can construct preservers of size 

|E(H)| ≤ O n0.72 |P| 0.56 + n0.6|P| 0.7 + n,

polynomially improving the previous best known online upper bound of O(min {n|P| 1/2, n 1/2|P|} +

n) (implicit in Coppersmith and Elkin [CE06]). They also studied the source-restricted online setting , where all demand pairs have one endvertex in a set S, and achieved preservers of size 

O(( n|P|| S|)1/2 + n), matching the offline upper bounds in this regime. Beyond upper bounds, their work connected online preservers to the competitive ratio of Online Directed Steiner Forest, improving the state-of-the-art ratio from O(n2/3+ ε) by Grigorescu et al [GLQ21] to O(n3/5+ ε).In parallel, other recent developments have further refined the trade-offs between preserver size and adaptivity in the online setting, including results on non-adaptive constructions where all paths must be fixed in advance. These advances highlight that, unlike the offline model where tight extremal bounds are better understood, the online setting still presents significant gaps and open directions. 13 Related Works of Fair Clustering 

The study of fair clustering was initiated by Chierichetti et al. [CKL +17], who introduced the fair-let framework for k-center/ k-median/ k-means clustering with two colors, later extended to multiple colors by Rösner and Schmidt [RS18]. Their proportional-fairness model requires that the demo-graphic distribution within each cluster reflect the global proportions of the dataset. Building on this foundation, Ahmadian et al. [AEK +20] proposed an alternative model where, for each color ci,the number of ci vertices in any cluster is bounded by a parameter σi|F |, offering finer control of demographic representation. A number of subsequent works explored complementary formulations of fairness. Huang et al. [HJV19] introduced coreset constructions that preserve both cost and fairness constraints, enabling scalable fair k-median/ k-means clustering. Backurs et al. [BIV +19] developed scalable approxi-mation algorithms that extend fairlet ideas to near-linear running time. Chen et al. [CFL +19] studied proportionally fair clustering , requiring each cluster to approximately reflect global propor-tions, and provided bicriteria approximations. Bera et al. [BCF +19] handled overlapping sensitive groups, ensuring fairness constraints are satisfied simultaneously for multiple (possibly intersecting) populations. Esmaeili et al. [EBT +20] proposed a group-oblivious probabilistic model, relaxing hard constraints to fairness-in-expectation, useful when group memberships are uncertain. Beyond geometric clustering, fairness has also been studied in unweighted correlation clustering .Ahmadian et al. [AEK +20] initiated this direction by incorporating fairness into the minimize-disagreements objective, followed by alternative formulations [AGS +20] and improved guarantees [AN23]. Finally, fairness has been extended to rank aggregation, which can be viewed as 1-clustering over permutations. Wei et al. [WIS +22] introduced proportionate fairness in aggregating rankings, and Chakraborty et al. [CDK +22] developed constant-factor approximations for fair rank aggrega-tion. 

# Related Works of Fair Clustering in Streaming setting 

Fair clustering was formalized by Chierichetti et al.[CKL +17], with subsequent work focusing on improving scalability and approximation guarantees under fairness constraints. A major bottleneck in early approaches was the cost of computing fairlet decompositions , which limited applicability to large datasets. Backurs et al. [BIO +19] addressed this issue by proposing a near-linear time algorithm for fair k-median clustering. Their approach leverages probabilistic embeddings into hier-archically well-separated trees (HSTs) to compute (r, b )-fairlet decompositions efficiently, supporting general balance parameters and enabling scalability to massive datasets. Moving beyond offline settings, Bera et al. [BDG +22] initiated the study of fair k-center clus-tering in distributed and streaming models. They presented the first scalable algorithms in the MapReduce (MPC) and streaming settings, including a constant-round MPC algorithm and a two-pass streaming algorithm with constant-factor approximation guarantees. A key technical contri-bution is a compact weighted summary that significantly reduces the size of the fairness LP while preserving solution quality, enabling practical performance on large-scale data. Lin et al. [LGJ24] further advanced fair k-center clustering in the streaming model. They proposed a two-pass streaming algorithm achieving a (3 + ε)-approximation for the two-group case using O(k log n) memory, matching the best-known offline guarantees. They also developed a one-pass streaming algorithm with a (7 + ε)-approximation and extended their framework to handle an 14 arbitrary number of demographic groups without increasing asymptotic space complexity. Subsequently, Guo et al. [GLJ +26] improved the state of the art by designing a one-pass streaming algorithm with a tight approximation ratio of 5 using O(k log n) memory. Their approach is based on λ-independent center sets and a refined post-streaming selection procedure. Additionally, they showed improved guarantees for semi-structured data streams and demonstrated that their algorithm can be adapted to the offline setting to recover a 3-approximation, matching the best known bounds. While the above works focus primarily on insertion-only streams, Cohen-Addad et al. [CJY +25] studied fair clustering in the more challenging sliding window model , motivated by recency con-straints and data-retention policies. They established a strong impossibility result, showing that any algorithm achieving a finite multiplicative approximation under exact proportional fairness re-quires linear space. To overcome this barrier, they proposed relaxing fairness constraints by a (1 ±ε)

factor and designed a sublinear-space algorithm based on assignment-preserving coresets, demon-strating a fundamental separation between insertion-only and sliding-window streaming models for fair clustering. An important technique in streaming algorithms for clustering is the construction of coresets. A coreset is a small, weighted subset of the input data that approximately preserves the value of an optimization objective for all feasible solutions, thereby enabling efficient algorithms on massive datasets. Coresets are particularly valuable in streaming and distributed settings due to their composability and mergeability properties. In the context of fair clustering, however, classical coreset constructions often fail to preserve fairness constraints, motivating the development of fair coresets that simultaneously approximate clustering cost while respecting group-based or individual fairness requirements. Schmidt et al. [SSS19] initiated the study of fair coresets by introducing new coreset definitions for fair k-means that restore composability and admit insertion-only streaming algorithms. Huang et al. [HJV19] extended this line of work by constructing ε-coresets for fair k-median and k-means under multiple, possibly overlapping sensitive groups, with sizes independent of the dataset. Chhaya et al. [CDC +22] further generalized fair coresets to data-dependent constraints, providing the first coreset frameworks for fair regression and individually fair clustering. More recently, Mahabadi and Trajanovski [MT23] developed constant-factor composable coresets for fair diversity maximization under multiple distance-based objectives, demonstrating both strong theoretical guarantees and significant empirical speedups. 

# 1.3 Technical Overview 

In this section, we provide a technical overview of both reachability preservers and fair clustering. 

# Reachability Preservers 

Here, we provide a high-level idea for the construction of 2-FTRS . Let us start with a simple construction of a linear (in the number of vertices) sized 2-FTRS for a single pair. Recall, we already know of such a subgraph of O(n) size by [BCR16]. However, this new alternate construction will shed more light on the specific structure of a 2-FTRS , which will play a pivotal role in our constructions of 2-FTRS for multiple pairs. Given a directed graph G and a vertex-pair (s, t ), we construct a subgraph H(s,t ) as follows: First, consider two "maximally disjoint" s − t paths P 1(s,t )

15 and P 2(s,t ) (paths that meet only at the cut-edges and cut-vertices). We refer to these two paths as outer strands . Next, we add several coupling paths between these two outer strands, which are edge-disjoint from the outer strands. For each vertex v on the outer strands, we check for the "earliest" vertex on the strand P 1(s,t ) (and P 2(s,t )), from which there is a path Q1(s,t ),v (and Q2(s,t ),v ) to 

v that is edge-disjoint with both the outer strands. We refer to these paths Qi 

> (s,t ),v

as coupling paths. Roughly speaking, two outer strands together with the coupling paths constitute the subgraph H(s,t )

(see Figure 1.1). The actual construction is slightly different. Let us first briefly discuss why the above subgraph is a 2-FTRS for the pair (s, t ). Then we will comment on the issue with the above simple construction and how we overcome that. 

Figure 1.1: H(s,t )=2-FTRS for a single pair (s, t ). Two black paths are the outer strands and the purple paths are the coupling paths between them. Consider any two failure edges f1, f2. W.l.o.g. assume, they do not form an s − t cut-set; otherwise, after the failure there won’t be any s − t path. Now if both f1, f 2 lie on one of the two outer strands (i.e., either on P 1(s,t ) or P 2(s,t )), then since these two strands are maximally disjoint, one of them will survive after the failures. So, let f1, f2 lie on the strand P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t ) respectively. Then consider the subpaths of P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t ) above f1, f2, and the subpaths of P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t ) below 

f1, f2. Since by assumption f1, f 2 does not form an s − t cut-set, there must be a coupling path (edge-disjoint with P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t )) from one of the top subpaths to one of the bottom subpaths in 

G. Since H(s,t ) consists of all the coupling paths, we get a surviving path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. This shows that H(s,t ) is a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) . Moreover, one may observe from the above argument that, after failure of any two edges, one of the surviving paths in H(s,t ) must be of the following form: It first follows one of the outer strand from s to some vertex u, then takes a coupling path till some vertex v on one of the outer strands, and finally follows the corresponding outer strand from v to 

t. We refer to such a path as nice path . The existence of such nice paths helps us in proving the correctness of our 2-FTRS construction for multiple pairs in the subsequent sections. As we mentioned earlier, our actual construction is slightly different. The main issue with the above simple construction is that the constituted subgraph could be of size ω(n) (which is worse than [BCR16]) after adding all the coupling paths. To mitigate this issue, instead of adding all the coupling paths, we only add the "essential" coupling paths. (See Chapter 2 for details.) It allows us to achieve O(n) size bound without affecting the correctness of 2-FTRS . The guarantee of the existence of nice paths also remains unaffected. Of course, the correctness argument will become slightly more intricate. 16 Next, we use the above construction of a 2-FTRS of a single pair to study the dual fault-tolerant reachability preserver. Our input is a directed graph G = ( V, E ) with n vertices, and a vertex-pair set P ⊆ V × V .Until now, we only know of O(n|P| ) size 2-FTRS for any n-vertex graph G and pair set P.In this work, we provide a deterministic polynomial time construction of a pairwise 2-FTRS of size O(n4/3|P| 1/3). For simplicity, below, we briefly describe a construction that provides a slightly weaker bound, in particular, O(np|P| log n). In the actual construction, we get rid of the log n

factor by constructing a preserver with slack and then using the result of [Bod22]. To get a sparse 2-FTRS for a vertex-pair set P, we perform two-step sparsification. First, we apply our alternate construction of 2-FTRS for each of the pairs of P. Then take a union of all of these subgraphs to get a O(n|P| ) size intermediate subgraph Hinter , which is clearly a 2-FTRS for P. Next, we further sparsify this intermediate subgraph. Then we consider the top and bottom Θ( n2/3|P| −1/3) portions of the outer strands ( P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t )) of Hs,t , for each (s, t ) ∈ P .Next, we construct a greedy hitting set containing O(n1/3|P| 1/3 log n) vertices that intersects all these subpaths. We compute linear-sized single-source and single-destination 2-FTRS for each of these vertices in the hitting set using [BCR16]. Let H1 be the union of all these single-source and single-destination 2-FTRS . So, H1 is of size O(n4/3|P| 1/3 log n).Consider any two failure edges f1, f 2 and a pair (s, t ) ∈ P . If there is a surviving path in 

G \ { f1, f 2}, we know that there is a nice s − t path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. Using an argument similar to that in the oracle construction, if that nice path follows the top or bottom Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) portion of a outer strand, then there is also an s − t path in H1 \ { f1, f 2}. So now on, it suffices to look into the case when the surviving nice path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2} passes though a coupling path Qi

> (s,t ),v

,for some vertex v lying on the bottom Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) length subpath of a outer strand, that starts from some vertex u lying on the top Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) length subpath of a outer strand. If we could include the top and bottom Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) portion of the outer strands, and all the “essential” coupling path Qi

> (s,t ),v

’s with endvertices lying on the top and bottom Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3)

portions of the outer strands, we will be done. We indeed consider a union of the top and bottom 

Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) portion of the outer strands (for all (s, t ) ∈ P ), and let us denote that by H2. So, 

H2 is of size O(n2/3|P |2/3). Unfortunately, we do not have a guarantee on the length of the coupling paths. Thus, if we include all the required coupling paths, we cannot argue about the sparsity of the final subgraph. (This portion of the construction differs significantly from that of our oracle construction.) We consider the subgraph obtained by taking a union of all the "essential" coupling paths with endvertices lying on the top and bottom Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) portions of the outer strands. (Let us denote this union by B.) Then we sparsify this subgraph further. For that purpose, we first isolate all the "high frequency" vertices (iteratively) and remove all the coupling paths containing them. Since total number of coupling paths in this subgraph is only Θ( n2/3|P |2/3), we end up with "a few" ( O(n1/3|P |1/3)) high frequency vertices. Now, observe, in the remaining subgraph (denoted as 

H4), degree of each vertex is “small” (at most O(n1/3|P |1/3)). Next, for each of the high-frequency vertices, compute linear-sized single-source and single-destination 2-FTRS , and take a union of them to form a subgraph H3. The union of H1, H 2, H 3 and H4 constitute the final subgraph. It is not difficult to see that a surviving nice s − t path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2} either passes through one of the high frequency vertices, in which case we get an s−t path in H3; or is included in H2 ∪H4.Thus, the union of all H1, H 2, H 3 and H4 will be a 2-FTRS for P. It is worth mentioning that the correctness proof works only because of a guarantee of the existence of the nice path. Note, a nice path follows at most one coupling path as a subpath. Thus either that nice path follows the top or 17 bottom Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) portion of the outer strands, or the coupling sub-path is part of B, which we further sparsify to get H3 and H4. Without the guarantee of a nice path, there could be many coupling sub-paths in a surviving s − t path after failures. Endvertices of these coupling sub-paths may not lie on the top or bottom Θ( n2/3|P |−1/3) portion of the outer strands. As a result, we miss them in B. As a consequence, H3 ∪ H4 could not capture those coupling sub-paths. Observe, each of the Hi’s is of size at most O(n4/3|P| 1/3 log n) (the log n factor is only there for 

H1). So the total size is also O(n4/3|P |1/3 log n).

# Fair Clustering 

Let us first discuss the algorithms to find approximate weighted fair correlation clustering and fair consensus clustering, given that we have an algorithm to find an α-close fair clustering to an unfair clustering C given as input. 

Weighted Correlation Clustering. Suppose we are given two algorithmic primitives: (i) an 

α-approximate closest fair clustering algorithm, and (ii) a ρ-approximation algorithm for standard weighted correlation clustering. We show that combining these two primitives yields a fair weighted correlation clustering algorithm with approximation factor (α + ρ + αρ ).We construct a composed algorithm, denoted by fairfyCC . Given a weighted correlation clus-tering instance G, we first apply the ρ-approximation algorithm to obtain a clustering D whose cost is within a factor ρ of the optimum, but which is not necessarily fair. We then invoke the closest fair clustering algorithm on D to obtain a fair clustering F that is α-close to D.We now show that F is a (α + ρ + αρ )-approximation to the optimal weighted fair correlation clustering. Formally, we prove that 

cost( F) ≤ (α + ρ + αρ ) cost( F∗

> corr

),

where F∗ 

> corr

denotes an optimal (fair) weighted correlation clustering. To establish this bound, we rely on the following two inequalities, which hold for any two clusterings M and K defined on the same vertex set V .

• Inequality 1: cost( M) ≤ dist( M, K) + cost( K).

• Inequality 2: dist( M, K) ≤ cost( M) + cost( K).Both inequalities follow directly from the definitions of the cost function cost( ·) and the distance measure dist( ·, ·).We now complete the proof using these inequalities. 1. By Inequality 1, we have 

cost( F) ≤ cost( D) + dist( D, F).

2. Since D is a ρ-approximation to the optimal clustering F∗

> corr

, it follows that 

cost( D) ≤ ρ cost( F∗

> corr

).

3. Because F is α-close to D, we obtain 

dist( D, F) ≤ α dist( D, F∗

> corr

).

18 4. Applying Inequality 2 to the term dist( D, F∗

> corr

) and substituting the above bounds yields 

cost( F) ≤ (α + ρ + αρ ) cost( F∗

> corr

).

Hence, the resulting fair clustering F achieves a (α + ρ + αρ )-approximation to the optimal weighted fair correlation clustering. 

Consensus Clustering: Next, we propose an algorithm to find (α + 2) -approximate Fair Con-sensus Clustering , given that we have an algorithm to find an α-close fair clustering to a given unfair clustering C. Formally, given m input clusterings C1, . . . , Cm our goal is to find a fair clustering F

such that nX

> i=1

dist( Ci, F)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

≤ (α + 2) 

> n

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F∗

> con

)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

Here F∗ 

> con

is an optimal fair consensus clustering. We begin by computing, for each Ci, an α-close fair clustering Fi using the closest fair clustering algorithm. Then, we output the fair clustering Fk that minimizes the overall ℓ-mean objective. Next, we show that this approach guarantees a (α + 2) -approximation for Fair Consensus Clustering .Let F∗ be an optimal fair consensus clustering, and let Ci∗ be the input clustering closest to F∗.Using our α-close fair clustering algorithm, we obtain a fair clustering Fi∗ such that dist( Ci∗ , Fi∗ ) ≤

αdist( Ci∗ , F∗

> con

). By applying the triangle inequality, we get dist( Fi∗ , F∗

> con

) ≤ (α + 1)dist( Ci∗ , F∗

> con

).Now, for any other input clustering Cj , we have 

dist( Cj , Fi∗ ) ≤ dist( Cj , F∗

> con

) + dist( Fi∗ , F∗

> con

) ≤ (α + 2)dist( Cj , F∗

> con

),

since by assumption, Ci∗ is the input closest to F∗

> con

, ensuring dist( Ci∗ , F∗

> con

) ≤ dist( Cj , F∗

> con

).Thus, we conclude that there exists an input clustering Ci∗ whose corresponding fair cluster-ing Fi∗ achieves a (α + 2) -approximation. Since our algorithm selects the fair clustering Fk that minimizes the overall objective, it guarantees an overall approximation of (α + 2) .

Closest fair clustering (two colors): Let us now describe the technical overview of our approach when the vertex set V is divided into two disjoint color groups {red, blue }. For a cluster Ci, let 

blue (Ci) denote the blue vertices in Ci, and red (Ci) denote the red vertices in Ci. Given a clustering 

C, with the ratio between the number of blue and red vertices being p : 1 for some integer p ≥ 1,we call C a fair clustering if, for each i ∈ [w], the ratio between |blue (Ci) | and |red (Ci) | is exactly 

p : 1 . Next, we discuss how efficiently we can transform a given clustering C into its nearest fair clustering under various integer values of p.The algorithm proceeds in two steps: 1. Creating a p-divisible clustering: Given an input clustering C = {C1, C 2, . . . , C w}, we transform it into a new clustering T = {T1, T 2, . . . , T ψ} such that each cluster Ti contains a number of blue vertices that is a multiple of p. We call such a clustering T a p-divisible clustering. We use the abbreviation pdc for p-divisible clustering. 2. Making-Fair Step : We further process the clusters T1, T 2, . . . , T ψ to obtain a fair clustering 

F = {F1, F 2, . . . , F ι}.19 Let F∗ denote an optimal fair clustering closest to the input clustering C, with an associated distance of OPT. By definition, F∗ is also a pdc .If we propose an δ-approximation algorithm for the balancing step, then the distance between C

and T is at most δ ·OPT. Furthermore, since the distance between F∗ and T is at most (1+ δ)·OPT (by the triangle inequality), getting a α-approximation algorithm for the making-fair step ensures that the distance between T and F is at most (1 + δ)α · OPT. Thus, the total distance between the input clustering C and the final output fair clustering F

is at most (δ + α + δα ) · OPT, leading to an overall approximation ratio of (δ + α + δα ). This guarantees a constant-factor approximation when δ and α are constants. 

3.5-approximation for creating pdc : Let us provide an high level idea of the algorithm to create a pdc T .For every cluster Ci, we define the surplus of Ci as (|blue (Ci) | mod p) and its deficit as (p −

(|blue (Ci) | mod p)) . To balance each cluster, we either need to remove surplus vertices or add the required number of deficit vertices from another cluster. For each cluster, we define the cut cost as the cost of removing surplus vertices and the merge cost as the cost of adding deficit vertices. Next, we define our cut and merge strategy. We start by classifying clusters into two categories. Call a cluster merge cluster if its surplus is at least p/ 2; i.e., its merge cost is smaller than its cut cost. Otherwise, call it a cut cluster . For a merge cluster Ci, it is more efficient to add (p − (|blue (Ci) |

mod p)) vertices (its deficit), whereas, for a cut cluster Ci, it is optimal to remove (|blue (Ci) |

mod p) vertices (its surplus). A first-line approach is to remove surplus vertices from cut clusters and merge them into merge clusters, ensuring that the number of blue vertices in each cluster becomes a multiple of p. We start with this approach, referred to as AlgoforGeneral . However, we cannot guarantee that the total surplus across all clusters matches the total deficit. As a result, after this step, we may be left with only cut clusters or only merge clusters. If only merge clusters remain, then we call our subroutine AlgoforMerge . Here, since we cannot satisfy all merge requests, we need to cut from some merge clusters to provide the necessary vertices. This is challenging, as cutting is now costlier than merging for the remaining unbalanced clusters. The key intuition here is that if cutting is necessary, we need a nontrivial strategy to optimize the cost. To achieve this, we sort the merge clusters in non-increasing order of cut-cost − merge-cost ,ensuring optimal cutting decisions. An important observation is that the total deficit W across all clusters is a multiple of p. This follows from the existence of a fair clustering, which guarantees that there exists a way to process the input set of clusters such that the number of blue vertices in each cluster is a multiple of p. Additionally, if we cut k vertices from a cluster Ci to fulfill the k deficit of another cluster Cj , we effectively balance a total deficit of p vertices. This follows intuitively because if k is the surplus of Ci, then its deficit is p − k, ensuring that the combined deficit of Ci

and Cj sums up to p. Since the total deficit is W , we repeat this operation exactly W/p times, which is crucial for bounding the overall approximation cost. (See Fig. 1.2.) Next, we consider the simpler case where, after the initial cut-merge processing, we are left only with cut clusters, each having a surplus of size < p/ 2, in this case, we call our subroutine 

AlgoforCut . Here, we simply remove these surplus vertices from each cluster and combine them to form clusters of size exactly p, containing only blue vertices. A key question is why forming clusters of size p is the optimal choice rather than larger clusters. The reason is that ensuring size 

p may require partitioning surplus vertices from specific clusters, incurring additional costs. For example, consider the case where there are three cut clusters with surpluses of p/ 3, p/ 3, and p/ 2−1.20 5 B  2 B                      

> 49 B
> 38 B
> 18 B
> 28 B
> 5 B 10 B
> 39 B
> 28 B
> 18 B
> 1 B
> 1 B
> CUT (s(Di)<p/2)MERGE (s(Di)≥p/2)
> AlgoForGeneral (Merge Case)
> NEWCUT MERGE ′
> Merge Case: Cutting a cluster
> multiple times
> 2 B
> 1 B
> 2 B
> Surplus
> 39 B
> 28 B
> 15 B
> Merge Case: Cutting a MERGE
> cluster
> 3B
> 2B
> 1B
> D1
> D2
> D3
> D4
> D5
> D1
> D3
> D4
> D5
> Suppose initially |blue (D1)|=12
> 1 R
> 6 R
> 7 R
> 14 R 1 R
> 7 R
> 6 R
> 7 R
> 6 R
> 1 R
> p=5
> D1
> D3
> D4
> D5NEWCUT MERGE ′
> (a) (b) (c)

Figure 1.2: Visualization of the scenario when only merge clusters remain after executing Algo-General, which converts (a) to (b). Now, the total deficit W = 5 , and thus, depending on the 

cutcost − mergecost , either an already cut cluster needs to be cut further (depicted in (b)), or a single merge cluster needs to be cut (depicted in (c)). In each cluster, xB (resp., yR ) denotes that the number of blue (resp., red) vertices is x (resp., y). Following our strategy to form a cluster of size p, we must partition at least one existing cluster. One might wonder whether it is more efficient to combine even more clusters and create a cluster of size 2p instead of p. However, through careful analysis, we show that accommodating clusters of size > p results in higher merge costs than the partition cost. Thus, forming clusters of size exactly 

p is the optimal strategy for combining surplus vertices efficiently. (See Fig. 1.3.) 

Making a pdc Fair: Given a pdc T = {T1, T 2, . . . , T ψ} here we discuss the step to convert it to a fair clustering F = {F1, F 2, . . . , F ι}. For this, we present a 3-approximation algorithm 

MakeClustersFair .We define a cluster Ti as RedHeavy if it has surplus red vertices, meaning |blue (Ti) | <p|red (Ti) |. Let s(Ti) denote the set of surplus red vertices in Ti, such that |s(Ti)| = |red (Ti) | − 

(1 /p )|blue (Ti) | and s(Ti) ⊆ red (Ti). Otherwise, we define Ti as BlueHeavy if it has a deficit of red vertices, meaning |blue (Ti) | > p |red (Ti) |. Let d(Ti) represent the set of deficit red vertices deficit in Ti, given by |d(Ti)| = (1 /p )|blue (Ti) | − | red (Ti) | and d(Ti) ⊆ V \ Ti.Next, we discuss how to eliminate surplus red vertices and redistribute them to address the deficits. To achieve this, we simply remove the surplus vertices from clusters in RedHeavy and reassign them to clusters in BlueHeavy to compensate for the deficit. A crucial observation is that the existence of a fair clustering guarantees that the total surplus from all clusters in RedHeavy 

matches the total deficit across all clusters in BlueHeavy , thereby making the redistribution process well-defined. We now proceed to analyze the approximation. We first claim that, since p > 1 removing surplus vertices and redistributing them to fulfill deficits is indeed optimal. A key subtlety we need to address is the case where a specific surplus 

s(Ti) is distributed across multiple clusters to fulfill their deficits. This redistribution involves splitting s(Ti), which incurs an additional cost. However, even in an optimal fair clustering, s(Ti)

must be transformed into a fair cluster, requiring the merging of p|s(Ti)| blue vertices with s(Ti).The cost of this merging is p|s(Ti)|2, while the maximum splitting cost of s(Ti) is at most |s(Ti)|2/2.21 p = 5            

> 49 B
> 7 R
> 38 B
> 7 R
> 19 B
> 6 R
> 5 B 2 B 1 B
> 1 B
> 1 B 1 B
> 2 B 1 B
> 1 B
> 2 B
> 2 B
> 2 B
> 2 B
> 10 B
> 40 B
> 20 B
> 40 B E1
> (Extra cluster)
> 10 R
> 9 R
> 6 R
> 1 R
> D1
> D3
> D4
> D5
> D2
> D6
> D7
> D8
> Surplus
> CUT (s(Di)<p/2)MERGE (s(Di)≥p/2)
> 5 B
> 10 B
> 40 B
> 20 B
> 40 B
> 50 B
> 40 B
> 20 B
> 5 B
> 7 R
> 7 R
> 6 R
> 6 R
> 1 R
> 9 R
> 10 R
> T1
> T2
> T3
> T5
> T4
> T8
> T7
> T6
> T9

Figure 1.3: Visualization of the scenario when only cut clusters remain after executing AlgoGeneral. The extra surplus vertices of clusters D3, D 4, D 5 form an extra cluster E1 of size p, containing only blue vertices. In each cluster, xB (resp., yR ) denotes that the number of blue (resp., red) vertices is x (resp., y). Since p > 1, the splitting cost of s(Ti) remains bounded by its merging cost, ensuring the overall 

3-approximation guarantee. In the case where multiple surplus clusters contribute to fulfilling a deficit d(Ti), our algorithm incurs an intra-cluster cost of at most |d(Ti)|2/2. Since p > 1, a similar argument as before ensures that, despite this additional cost, we still remain within the claimed approximation guarantee. 

Closest Fair Clustering (more than two colors): Let us now present a technical overview of our approach for constructing a closest fair clustering to a given input clustering C when there are more than two colored groups. Our contributions can be broadly divided into three parts: (i) When the vertex set V is partitioned into disjoint color groups of equal size, and the total number of colors |χ| is a power of two. (ii) When the vertex set V is partitioned into disjoint color groups of equal size, but the number of colors |χ| is arbitrary. (iii) When the vertex set V is partitioned into disjoint color groups of arbitrary sizes. Let us now describe the common theme of our algorithms for the above three cases. Given an input clustering C, we construct a fair clustering F through a sequence of intermediate clusterings 

C = J 0 → J 1 → J 2 → · · · J t−1 → J t = F.

At each intermediate step J i, the algorithm progressively enforces fairness across subsets of colors by satisfying a locally fair condition . Specifically, in each iteration, the color set is partitioned into smaller blocks, and within each block, the algorithm balances color proportions using a sur-plus–deficit adjustment procedure similar to the two-color case. As the process proceeds, these locally fair clusterings become increasingly aligned with the global fairness constraints, ultimately 22 yielding a fair clustering F that closely approximates the input C. Now, suppose at each step we get an approximation factor of ν that is, 

dist( J k−1, J k) ≤ ν · dist( J k−1, F∗) (1.1) Then overall, we get an approximation factor of (( ν + 1) t − 1) that is 

dist( C, F) ≤ (( ν + 1) t − 1)dist( C, F∗) (1.2) We prove it using mathematical induction. It is easy to see that Eq. (1.2) holds after the 1st iteration. That is 

dist( C, J 1) ≤ ν · dist( C, F∗)

just by putting k = 1 in Eq. (1.1). Note J 0 = C.Now, as an induction hypothesis, suppose Eq. (1.2) holds for t = k − 1 that is 

dist( C, J k−1) ≤ (( ν + 1) k−1 − 1)dist( C, F∗) (1.3) Note, J t = F.Now, we prove it for t = k.

dist( J k−1, J k) ≤ ν dist( J k−1, F∗)

≤ ν (dist( J k−1, C) + dist( C, F∗)) 

(triangle inequality) 

≤ ν (( ν + 1) k−1 − 1)dist( C, F∗) + ν dist( C, F∗)

(by IH) 

= ν (ν + 1) k−1dist( C, F∗) (1.4) Now, we have 

dist( C, J k) ≤ dist( C, J k−1) + dist( J k−1, J k)

(triangle inequality) 

≤ (( ν + 1) k−1 − 1)dist( C, F∗) + ν · (ν + 1) k−1dist( C, F∗)

(by IH and Eq. (1.4)) 

= (( ν + 1) k − 1)dist( C, F∗)

Now, let us describe the high-level ideas of the algorithms for each of the above cases. 

Equal Representation with Power-of-Two Colors. When the vertex set V is partitioned into disjoint color groups of equal size, and the total number of colors |χ| is a power of two, we design an algorithm called fairpower-of-two . The algorithm fairpower-of-two constructs a globally fair clustering Ffpt by progressively enforcing fairness across larger groups of colors in a hierarchical 23 manner. Starting from an input clustering C defined over a vertex set V , whose points are colored from a color set χ = {c1, c 2, . . . , c d}, the algorithm proceeds in log |χ| iterations: 

C = N 0 → N 1 → · · · → N log |χ| = Ffpt ,

where N i denotes the clustering obtained after the ith iteration. In each iteration i, the color set χ is partitioned into contiguous blocks of size 2i as 

Bij = {c(j−1) ·2i+1 , c (j−1) ·2i+2 , . . . , c j·2i }, for j = 1 , . . . , |χ|/2i.

Hence, iteration i enforces local fairness within each block Bij , while later iterations progressively extend this fairness across larger unions of colors. At the beginning of iteration i, the clustering N i−1 is already locally fair with respect to all blocks of size 2i−1. The objective of the current iteration is to produce a new clustering N i such that, for every cluster N ia ∈ N i and for every block Bij , all colors within Bij appear equally in N ia.Formally, for all x, y ∈ { 1, . . . , 2i} with x̸ = y,

c(j−1) ·2i+x(N ia) = c(j−1) ·2i+y(N ia),

where cr(N ia) denotes the number of points of color cr in cluster N ia.To achieve this, the algorithm first identifies the surplus between each pair of disjoint consecutive blocks within every cluster. For a given cluster N ia and adjacent blocks Bij and Bij+1 for odd j, the surplus T ja is defined as the excess number of points in the larger block relative to the smaller one. Formally, if |Bij (N ia)| > |Bij+1 (N ia)|, then T ja is a subset of Bij (N ia) of size |Bij (N ia)| − | Bij+1 (N ia)|,chosen so that each color in Bij contributes equally to T ja . The definition is symmetric when 

|Bij+1 (N ia)| > |Bij (N ia)|, here B(S) for S ⊆ V and B ⊆ χ denotes the subset of vertices in S that has a color in B.After identifying these surpluses, the algorithm temporarily removes them from their respective clusters and collects them into two multisets, Sj and Sj+1 , corresponding to the adjacent blocks Bij

and Bij+1 . These two multisets are then passed to the multi-GM subroutine. The multi-GM subroutine is responsible for merging subsets from Sj and Sj+1 to create new clusters that are locally fair with respect to the union of the two blocks Bij ∪ Bij+1 . It proceeds greedily by pairing subsets of comparable size from the two collections, trimming from the larger subset when necessary, and merging them into balanced clusters. Each resulting cluster thus contains an equal number of points from every color in Bij ∪ Bij+1 . The newly formed fair clusters are then inserted into N i, replacing the previously unbalanced (see Fig. 1.4). Consequently, each iteration enforces fairness locally across pairs of adjacent color blocks while maintaining at most a factor-2 deviation from the previous clustering. After log |χ| iterations, all colors lie within a single block, and every cluster satisfies global equal representation among all colors. The cumulative approximation factor across all iterations is therefore bounded by 

O(3 log |χ|) = O(|χ|1.6).At a high level, the intuition behind the 2-approximation at each step is as follows. For every pair of adjacent color blocks Bi 

> 2k−1

and Bi

> 2k

, the algorithm first removes the surplus T a 

> 2k−1

from a cluster N i−1 

> a

. This removal incurs a cost of |T a

> 2k−1

| · | N i−1 

> a

|. In the subsequent step, within the 

multi-gm subroutine, these |T a

> 2k−1

| surplus points are merged with an equal number of points taken 24 5c1      

> 7c2
> 8c3
> 2c4
> 5c1
> 3c2
> 2c3
> 8c4
> 5c1
> 5c2
> 2c3
> 2c4
> 3c1
> 3c2
> 2c3
> 2c4
> 2c1
> 2c2
> 6c3
> 6c4
> 2c1
> 2c2
> 2c3
> 2c4
> 2c1
> 2c2
> 2c3
> 2c4
> 3c1
> 3c2
> 3c3
> 3c4
> 1c1
> 1c2
> 1c3
> 1c4
> 2c1
> 2c2
> 2c3
> 2c4
> 𝒞 =𝒩 0𝒩 1𝒩 2=ℱfpt

Figure 1.4: Visualization of the fairpower-of-two algorithm with four colors {c1, c 2, c 3, c 4} where 

nc i denotes that the number vertices of color ci is n. In the 1st iteration the color blocks are 

B11 = {c1, c 2} and B12 = {c3, c 4}. So, in N 1 we make number of vertices of color c1 equal to number of vertices of color c2 and number of vertices of color c3 equal to number of vertices of color c4. In the 2nd iteration we have B21 = {c1, c 2, c 3, c 4}, thus all color are equally represented in N 2.from other clusters. Hence, the total cost incurred by our algorithm for balancing the color blocks 

(Bi

> 2k−1

, B i

> 2k

) in the cluster N i−1 

> a

is at most 

|T a

> 2k−1

|  |N i−1 

> a

| − | T a

> 2k−1

| + |T a

> 2k−1

|2 = |T a

> 2k−1

| · | N i−1 

> a

|.

To see that the optimal solution F∗ must incur a comparable cost, suppose that in F∗, the cluster 

N i−1 

> a

is partitioned into subsets X1, X 2, . . . , X s. (The case s = 1 corresponds to N i−1 

> a

remaining intact in F∗.) For the two color blocks Bi 

> 2k−1

and Bi

> 2k

, we define surpluses Skj ⊆ Xj in such a way that sX

> j=1

|Skj | = |T a

> 2k−1

|.

The optimal solution must pay a cost of at least 

12

> s

X

> j=1



|Skj | · | N i−1 

> a

\ Xj | + |Skj | · | Xj |



= 12 |T a

> 2k−1

| · | N i−1 

> a

|.

The first term, |Skj | · | N i−1 

> a

\ Xj |, accounts for pairs (u, v ) that were in the same cluster N i−1 

> a

in the input but are separated in F∗. The second term, |Skj |·| Xj |, captures the merging operation required in F∗ to restore local fairness within each subcluster Xj . The multiplicative factor 12 corrects for double counting, since a pair (u, v ) with u ∈ Skj and v ∈ Skℓ (j̸ = ℓ) would otherwise be counted twice in the summation. To ensure every unordered pair is counted exactly once, we charge each vertex a cost of 12 .Thus, even in the optimal solution F∗, the minimum possible cost is at least 12 |T a

> 2k−1

| · | N i−1 

> a

|, while our algorithm pays |T a

> 2k−1

| · | N i−1 

> a

|. Hence, the cost of our algorithm is at most twice that of F∗,establishing the 2-approximation guarantee for each step. 25 Equal Representation with Arbitrary Number of Colors. When the vertex set V is parti-tioned into disjoint color groups of equal size, but the number of colors |χ| is arbitrary (not neces-sarily a power of two), we design an algorithm called fair-equi . The algorithm fair-equi builds upon two subroutines: fairpower-of-two and make-pdc-fair . The subroutine fairpower-of-two 

is already described. Let us first describe the high-level idea of make-pdc-fair and then present the construction of fair-equi .

High-Level Idea of make-pdc-fair . The subroutine make-pdc-fair takes as input a clustering 

I = {I1, I 2, . . . , I η} over a vertex set V whose points are colored from a color set ζ = {z1, z 2, . . . , z r}.The total number of points of each color satisfies a prescribed global proportion 

z1(V ) : z2(V ) : . . . : zr(V ) = p1 : p2 : . . . : pr,

where, without loss of generality, p1 > p 2 > · · · > p r. Furthermore, each cluster Ii in I is assumed to be p-divisible —that is, the number of points of each color zj in Ii is an integer multiple of pj .The goal of make-pdc-fair is to transform I into a clustering Fmpf such that every cluster 

F ∈ F mpf satisfies 

z1(F ) : z2(F ) : . . . : zr(F ) = p1 : p2 : . . . : pr.

The algorithm proceeds in ⌈log 2 r⌉ iterations, progressively aligning the local color proportions toward the global target ratio. Starting from F0 := I, it maintains a sequence of refined clusterings 

I = F0 → F 1 → · · · → F ⌈log 2 r⌉ = Fmpf .

In each iteration t, make-pdc-fair merges adjacent color blocks in a hierarchical fashion. Initially, each color forms a singleton block B0 

> j

= {zj }; at every subsequent iteration t ≥ 1, consecutive blocks are merged in pairs: 

Bti = Bt−12i−1 ∪ Bt−12i , for i = 1 , 2, . . . , 

j mt−1

2

k

.

If the number of blocks mt−1 is odd, the final block remains unpaired and is carried forward unchanged. This process continues until all colors are contained in a single block at iteration 

T = ⌈log 2 r⌉.At every iteration t, the algorithm ensures that all colors within each block Bti appear in every cluster in proportion to their prescribed global ratios. To achieve this, make-pdc-fair compares the scaling factors of two adjacent blocks Bt−12i−1 and Bt−12i within each cluster and tries to equalize the scaling factor. To understand how make-pdc-fair equalizes scaling factors, recall that after iteration (t − 1) , every cluster F t−1 satisfies the correct color ratios within each block Bt−12i−1 and 

Bt−12i separately. In particular, for 

Bt−12i−1 = {za1 , . . . , z as } and Bt−12i = {zb1 , . . . , z bu },

we can write the color counts of zaj and zbk for j ∈ [1 , s ] and k ∈ [1 , u ] respectively inside F t−1 as 

zaj (F t−1) = paj · x, zbk (F t−1) = pbk · y, 

where the integers x and y are the scaling factors of the two blocks. The values x and y indicate how many times the global ratio vector (pa1 , . . . , p as ) or (pb1 , . . . , p bu ) is realized inside the cluster. 26 10 c1      

> 9c2
> 6c3
> 10 c1
> 3c2
> 2c3
> 10 c1
> 6c2
> 6c3
> 10 c1
> 6c2
> 2c3
> 10 c1
> 6c2
> 4c3
> 10 c1
> 4c3
> 6c2
> ℐ=ℱ0ℱ1ℱ2=ℱmpf
> F1
> 1
> F1
> 2

Figure 1.5: Visualization of the make-pdc-fair algorithm for three colors {c1, c 2, c 3}, with 20 , 12 ,and 8 vertices respectively, corresponding to a global ratio of 5 : 3 : 2 . In the first iteration, the color blocks are B11 = {c1, c 2} and B12 = {c3}. Hence, in the intermediate clustering F1, each cluster maintains the local ratio c1 : c2 = 5 : 3 . The scaling factor of block B11 in cluster F 11 is x = 2 , while that of B12 is y = 3 . To align these scaling factors, the algorithm cuts 2( y − x) = 2 vertices of color 

c3 from F 11 and merges them into F 12 , yielding the final fair clustering F2 = Fmpf .When merging these two sub-blocks into a single block Bti = Bt−12i−1 ∪ Bt−12i , our goal is to make the entire set of colors jointly proportional to their global ratios (pa1 , . . . , p as , p b1 , . . . , p bu ). This is possible only if both sub-blocks share the same scaling factor, i.e., x = y. If x̸ = y, then one group of colors is overrepresented relative to the other. To correct this imbalance, make-pdc-fair performs a controlled adjustment. Suppose x < y—that is, the sub-block Bt−12i currently represents the global proportions at a larger scale. The algorithm reduces its contribution by removing pbk · (y − x) points of each color zbk uniformly across the cluster. If x > y then the sub-block Bt−12i under represents the global proportions. The algorithm increases its contribution by adding pbk · (x − y) points of each color zbk to match the total mass. After this operation, both sub-blocks contribute exactly the same total scaling factor 

x′ = y′ = min( x, y ), ensuring that within the combined block Bti , we have 

za1 (F t) : . . . : zas (F t) : zb1 (F t) : . . . : zbu (F t) = pa1 : . . . : pas : pb1 : . . . : pbu .

(see Fig. 1.5) At each step, the algorithm make-pdc-fair incurs an approximation of 6, thus giving an overall approximation of 7log |ζ| = |ζ|2.81 .Since in this setting paj ≥ pbk for all j ∈ [s] and k ∈ [u], the high-level idea behind the 6-approximation at each step of the algorithm make-pdc-fair closely mirrors the reasoning behind the 3-approximation guarantee of the algorithm MakeClustersFair in the two-color case. Recall that MakeClustersFair is the algorithm that transforms a pdc into a fair clustering when the vertex set is divided into two color groups. The additional multiplicative factor of 2 in the approximation bound of make-pdc-fair arises to account for overcounting in the optimal solution, since in the multi-color setting each block may contain multiple colors, and interactions between these colors can lead to double counting of pairwise contributions. 27 High-Level Idea of fair-equi . The algorithm fair-equi takes as input a clustering C whose vertices are colored from χ = {c1, c 2, . . . , c d}, where the colors are distributed equally but |χ| is not a power of two. The key idea is to combine the structural fairness guarantees of fairpower-of-two 

with the proportional balancing capability of make-pdc-fair .The algorithm proceeds as follows. First, we partition the color set χ into log |χ| disjoint groups 

G1, G 2, . . . , G log |χ| such that the size of each group Gj is a power of two. This is done greedily according to the binary representation of |χ|: for each index j ∈ [log ⌈| χ|⌉ ], if the corresponding bit in the binary representation of |χ| is 1, a group of size 2j−1 is created. Next, fair-equi applies fairpower-of-two independently within each color group Gj to obtain an intermediate clustering I = {I1, I 2, . . . , I η} satisfying that for every Ii ∈ I and every pair of colors 

ca, c b ∈ Gℓ,

ca(Ii) = cb(Ii).

Thus, fairpower-of-two ensures equal representation within each power-of-two-sized color group. We then treat each group Gℓ as a single meta-color zℓ ∈ ζ and invoke the make-pdc-fair 

subroutine on the intermediate clustering I. The clustering I serves as a p-divisible clustering because for each cluster Ii ∈ I , the count |Gℓ(Ii)| is divisible by |Gℓ|, where Gℓ(Ii) denotes the subset of vertices of Ii that has a color from the group Gℓ. Applying make-pdc-fair produces a final fair clustering F = {F1, . . . , F ι} such that for every cluster Fj ∈ F ,

|G1(Fj )| : |G2(Fj )| : . . . : |Glog |χ|(Fj )| = |G1| : |G2| : . . . : |Glog |χ||.

Since fairpower-of-two already enforces equality within each group Gℓ, the proportional balancing across groups performed by make-pdc-fair ensures that in the final clustering F, every color 

cu, c v ∈ χ satisfies cu(Fj ) = cv(Fj ). Thus, fair-equi outputs a globally fair clustering where all colors are equally represented in every cluster. As established earlier, the algorithm fairpower-of-two achieves an approximation factor of 

O(|χ|1.6). In the algorithm fair-equi , the number of meta-colors generated is at most log |χ|,and consequently, the subroutine make-pdc-fair contributes an additional approximation factor of O(log 2.81 |χ|). By applying the triangle inequality to combine the errors introduced by the two stages, the overall approximation factor of fair-equi becomes O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|).

Arbitrary Representation. When the vertex set V is divided into disjoint color groups of ar-bitrary sizes, we design an algorithm fair-general to construct a fair clustering that reflects the global color distribution. Let the vertices be colored from the set χ = {c1, c 2, . . . , c d}, and suppose their total counts satisfy the global ratio 

c1(V ) : c2(V ) : · · · : c|χ|(V ) = p1 : p2 : · · · : p|χ|.

To achieve fairness under these non-uniform proportions, we adopt a two-step approach analogous to the two-color case. In the first step, we construct a p-divisible clustering (pdc ) M = {M1, M 2, . . . , M t} using our algorithm create-pdc . Recall in a pdc M, for every cluster M ∈ M and every color cj ∈ χ, the number of points of color cj in M is divisible by pj .In the second step, we transform the p-divisible clustering M into a fair clustering F using 

make-pdc-fair such that for every cluster F ∈ F ,

c1(F ) : c2(F ) : · · · : c|χ|(F ) = p1 : p2 : · · · : p|χ|.

28 High level idea of create-pdc : To construct a pdc , we proceed iteratively over the colors in 

χ. For each color cj , we apply the algorithm AlgoforGeneral introduced in the two-color case. At iteration j, the algorithm AlgoforGeneral is applied to the current clustering to ensure that, within every cluster, the number of vertices of color cj becomes a multiple of pj . Thus, after processing all colors sequentially, in the resulting clustering for all colors cj the number of vertices of color cj is divisible by pj .Recall that in the two-color setting, the algorithm AlgoforGeneral takes as input a clustering whose vertices are divided into two color groups—say blue and red—such that the global ratio of blue to red points is p : 1 . The output of AlgoforGeneral is a refined clustering where, in every cluster, the number of blue vertices is a multiple of p. By applying this procedure iteratively to each color cj , we generalize the same principle to the multi-color setting, thereby obtaining a pdc .As discussed earlier, the algorithm AlgoforGeneral achieves an approximation factor of 3.5

in the two-color setting. When AlgoforGeneral is applied iteratively across all colors in χ, these approximation factors accumulate, resulting in an overall approximation factor of O(|χ|) for the algorithm create-pdc . It is worth noting that if one were to apply a direct analysis using the triangle inequality, a constant-factor approximation ν at each step would compound multiplicatively, yielding an overall factor of ν|χ|. To avoid this exponential blow-up, we adopt a refined analytical approach inspired by Chakraborty et al. [CCD +25], originally developed for the two-color setting where the blue-to-red ratio is an arbitrary p : q. This sophisticated analysis allows us to bound the cumulative approximation additively rather than multiplicatively, thereby ensuring an O(|χ|)

guarantee for create-pdc .

High-Level Idea of fair-general : Given an input clustering C, the algorithm fair-general 

proceeds in two stages. First, it applies create-pdc to construct a pdc clustering M, ensuring that within each cluster, the number of points of color cj is divisible by pj . Subsequently, it invokes 

make-pdc-fair on M to produce the final fair clustering F.The algorithm create-pdc achieves an approximation factor of O(|χ|), while make-pdc-fair 

contributes an additional factor of O(|χ|2.81 ). Combining these guarantees, fair-general attains an overall approximation factor of O(|χ|3.81 ).

# Fair Consensus Clustering in the Streaming Setting 

In fair consensus clustering, the input consists of a collection of clusterings I = {C 1, . . . , Cm} defined on a common vertex set. The objective is to compute a fair clustering F such that 

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

≤ (α + 1 .995) 

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F∗

> con

)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

,

where F∗ 

> con

denotes an optimal fair consensus clustering, and α, ℓ are fixed parameters. We assume oracle access to an α-approximate closest fair clustering algorithm. Our goal is to compute such a clustering F using only O(n log m) space and O n2 log 4 m + t1(n) log 3 m time, where t1(n) denotes the running time of an unweighted fair correlation clustering algorithm. We work in the streaming model pairwise streaming model described in Section 1.1. We now describe our streaming algorithm, denoted by algo-fair-con-stream .29 High-Level Idea of algo-fair-con-stream : Recall that in the pairwise consensus streaming model , each stream element is a triple (p, j, b ) that encodes information about the j-th clustering 

Cj ∈ I. Prior to processing the stream, we uniformly sample 4g log m indices j1, . . . , j 4g log m from 

[m], for a suitable constant g > 1, and store only the information corresponding to the sampled clusterings Cj1 , . . . , Cj4g log m .Using these sampled clusterings, we construct a candidate set of fair clusterings, denoted by 

eF. The key guarantee is that, with high probability, eF contains at least one fair clustering F that achieves an (α + 1 .995) -approximation to the optimal fair consensus clustering. Accordingly, we output the clustering 

F = arg min  

> F′∈eF
> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F′)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

.

A key technical challenge in our setting is evaluating the objective value of a candidate clustering 

F′ ∈ eF. In the streaming model, computing its distance to all input clusterings Ci ∈ I is infeasible, since only O(log m) clusterings can be stored at any time. To overcome this limitation, we leverage a result due to Indyk [Ind99; Ind01]. Specifically, if we uniformly sample a subset W ⊆ I of size 

Ω( ε−2 log m), for any 0 < ε < 1, then with probability at least 1 − 1/m , the following guarantee holds: mX

> i=1

dist( Ci, Fbest ,W )ℓ

!1/ℓ 

≤ (1 + ε)

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, Fbest ,I)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

.

Here, Fbest ,W denotes the fair clustering in eF that minimizes the objective when evaluated only on the sampled set W, while Fbest ,I denotes the fair clustering in eF that minimizes the objective when evaluated over the full set I.We therefore independently sample an additional 64 ε−2 log m clusterings from I to form the set W, and use W to approximately evaluate the objective function for all candidates in eF. Since we store only O(log m) clusterings in total, and each clustering requires O(n) space, the overall space complexity of the algorithm is O(n log m). To analyze the approximation factor and the time complexity of the algorithm, we need to look at the construction of eF.

Construction of the Candidate Set eF: After sampling 4g log m input clusterings, for each sampled clustering Ck (where k ∈ [4 g log m]), we compute and store its α-close fair clustering FCk

in the candidate set eF. In addition, for every triple (Cx, Cy, Cz ) of sampled clusterings, we perform the following steps. (i) We construct an unweighted correlation clustering instance Gx,y,z from the three clusterings 

Cx, Cy, and Cz . For each unordered vertex pair (u, v ), the edge (u, v ) in Gx,y,z is assigned a positive label if u and v are placed in the same cluster in at least two of the three clusterings; otherwise, the edge is assigned a negative label. (ii) We compute an unweighted fair correlation clustering Tx,y,z on the graph Gx,y,z using a known algorithm for unweighted fair correlation clustering. (iii) We add the clustering Tx,y,z to the candidate set eF.We refer to the above procedure as the cluster fitting algorithm, denoted by ClusterFitting .We now provide intuition for why the ClusterFitting algorithm is effective. 30 Let F∗ 

> con

denote an optimal fair consensus clustering. For each input clustering Ci ∈ I, let Ii

denote the set of unordered vertex pairs (u, v ) ∈ V × V such that u and v are clustered together (respectively, separated) in F∗

> con

, but are separated (respectively, clustered together) in Ci. By definition, 

dist( Ci, F∗

> con

) = |Ii|.

We further define 

OPT =

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F∗

> con

)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

and AVG = OPT 

m .

It can be shown that if at least m/g input clusterings are close to the optimal solution F∗

> con

,that is, if there exists a set of at least m/g indices such that 

|Ii| ≤ (1 − β)AVG 

for some parameter β > 1, then with high probability our sampling procedure selects one such clustering Ci. In this case, the corresponding α-close fair clustering FCi yields an (α + 1 .995) -approximation to the optimal fair consensus clustering. The more challenging case arises when fewer than m/g clusterings are close to F∗

> con

. In this regime, the ClusterFitting algorithm becomes crucial. Specifically, consider triples (Cx, Cy, Cz ) for which each of |Ix|, |Iy|, and |Iz | is large—exceeding (1 − β)AVG —but whose pairwise intersections are bounded. That is, for all distinct r, s ∈ { x, y, z },

|Ir ∩ Is| ≤ α AVG .

For such triples, the fair clustering Tx,y,z produced by the ClusterFitting algorithm is close to the optimal solution F∗

> con

, and consequently achieves an (α + 1 .995) -approximation. The intuition underlying why the clustering Tx,y,z is close to F∗ 

> con

is as follows. Consider a vertex pair (u, v ) ∈ Ir∩Is

for some distinct indices r, s ∈ { x, y, z }. Without loss of generality, assume that u and v are clustered together in Cr and Cs. Since (u, v ) ∈ Ir ∩ Is, it follows that u and v are separated in the optimal fair consensus clustering F∗

> con

.By construction of the correlation clustering instance Gx,y,z , the edge (u, v ) receives a positive label whenever u and v are clustered together in at least two of the three clusterings Cx, Cy, and 

Cz . Therefore, for the pair (u, v ) under consideration, the edge (u, v ) is labeled positive in Gx,y,z .Consequently, in the unweighted fair correlation clustering Tx,y,z computed from Gx,y,z , vertices u

and v are placed in the same cluster. When comparing Tx,y,z to the optimal clustering F∗

> con

, the clustering Tx,y,z incurs a cost for the pair (u, v ), since u and v are clustered together in Tx,y,z but separated in F∗

> con

. Thus, every pair belonging to the intersection Ir ∩ Is necessarily contributes to the disagreement between Tx,y,z and 

F∗

> con

. Therefore, if the total number of such pairs is bounded, the overall disagreement between 

Tx,y,z and F∗ 

> con

is small, implying that Tx,y,z is close to F∗

> con

.We show that, with high probability, our sampling procedure selects clusterings Cx, Cy, and Cz

whose corresponding pairwise intersections are bounded. Consequently, with high probability, the algorithm achieves an approximation factor of (α + 1 .995) .We now analyze the running time of the algorithm. The candidate set eF contains O(log 3 m)

clusterings. The dominating cost to construct these candidates is by applying the ClusterFitting 

procedure to all triples of sampled clusterings which requires O t1(n) log 3 m time. 31 To select the best clustering from eF, we evaluate the objective function for each candidate. This requires O(log 3 m) evaluations. In each evaluation, we compute the distance between the candidate clustering and each clustering in the sampled set W. Computing the distance between two clusterings takes O(n2) time, and since |W| = O(log m), the total time per evaluation is 

O(n2 log m). Therefore, the total time required for all evaluations is O(n2 log 4 m).Combining these bounds, the overall running time of the algorithm is 

O n2 log 4 m + t1(n) log 3 m .

# 1.4 Organization 

The remainder of this thesis is organized as follows. In Chapter 2, we present our results on fault-tolerant reachability preservers. The Chapter 3 studies the closest fair clustering problem when the vertex set V is partitioned into two disjoint color groups, while Chapter 4 extends these results to settings with more than two color groups. In Chapter 5, we explore the implications of our closest fair clustering framework for fair correlation clustering and fair consensus clustering. The Chapter 6 presents our algorithmic results for fair consensus clustering in the streaming setting. Finally, Chapter 7 outlines several open problems and directions for future research. 32 Chapter 2 

# Reachability Preservers 

In this chapter, we present a construction of a dual fault-tolerant reachability preserver (2-FTRS )for a given directed graph G = ( V, E ) and a vertex-pair set P ⊆ V × V . Specifically, we establish Theorem 1, which we restate below. 

Theorem 1 (Upper Bound on 2-FTRS ). For any directed graph G = ( V, E ) with n vertices and a set P ⊆ V × V of vertex-pairs, there exists a 2-FTRS (G, P) having at most O(n4/3|P| 1/3) edges. Furthermore, we can find such a subgraph in polynomial time. 

To prove this result, we first describe an alternate construction of a 2-FTRS for a single vertex pair. We then extend this construction to handle multiple pairs, thereby obtaining the general result. 

# 2.1 An (Alternate) Construction of 2-FTRS for a Single Pair 

Given any directed graph G with n vertices, for any pair of vertices (s, t ), we already get an O(n)

size 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) from [BCR16]. Let us state the result of [BCR16] formally here. 

Theorem 12 ([BCR16]) . For any directed graph G = ( V, E ), a designated source vertex s ∈ V ,and an integer k ≥ 1, there exists a (sparse) subgraph H of G which is a k-FTRS (G, {s} × V ) and contains at most 2kn edges. Moreover, such a subgraph is computable in O(2 kmn ) time, where n

and m are respectively the number of vertices and edges in graph G.

However, now we study the structure of a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) more closely and provide a slightly different construction which will be useful for our construction of 2-FTRS for multiple pairs. Let us first define a notation to denote the ordering of vertices on a specific path. For any path P and two vertices u, v on P , we will write u < P v if and only if u appears before v on P .Suppose we are given a directed graph G and a pair (s, t ). Let us consider two s − t paths P 1(s,t )

and P 2(s,t ), that intersect only at s − t cut-edges and s − t cut-vertices. We call these two paths 

outer strands . Next, we define coupling paths between these two outer strands. For each vertex on the outer strands, let us first define two coupling points of it (one on each outer strand). Consider a vertex v ∈ V (P 1(s,t ) ∪ P 2(s,t )) and i ∈ { 1, 2} where for a subgraph H of G, V (H) represents the set of vertices in the graph H. Then consider the vertex ui 

> (s,t ),v

∈ P i 

> (s,t )

(if exists) for which there is a 

ui 

> (s,t ),v

− v path that is edge-disjoint with both the outer strands, and there is no vertex u′ ∈ P i

> (s,t )

33 such that u′ <P i

> (s,t )

ui 

> (s,t ),v

and there is a u′ − v path that is edge-disjoint with both the outer strands. We refer to u1(s,t ),v , u 2(s,t ),v as coupling points of v. For each v on the outer strands and each coupling point ui 

> (s,t ),v

of it, consider any arbitrary ui 

> (s,t ),v

− v path (denoted as Qi

> (s,t ),v

) of G, that is edge-disjoint with both the outer strands. We refer to the path Qi 

> (s,t ),v

as a coupling path to v.Note, for each vertex v on the outer strands, there are at most two coupling points of it (one on each outer strand) and from each coupling point there is a coupling path to v. We take two outer strands and some of the coupling paths to build a subgraph H(s,t ). More specifically, for a vertex 

v ∈ V (P j

> (s,t )

), if for all the vertices below v on that strand, their coupling points on a strand P i

> (s,t )

is below the coupling point of v on that strand, then only add the coupling path from the strand 

P i 

> (s,t )

to v. Later, we prove that keeping these "essential" coupling paths is sufficient. Below we provide a formal description of the procedure to construct H(s,t ). Given G and a pair 

(s, t ), we build a subgraph H(s,t ) as follows: 1. V (H(s,t )) = V (G).2. Add all the edges on the paths P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t ) (two outer strands) to H(s,t ).3. For all i, j ∈ { 1, 2} and v ∈ V (P j

> (s,t )

)

(a) If for all v′ ∈ V (P j

> (s,t )

[v − t]) , ui 

> (s,t ),v

<P i

> (s,t )

ui 

> (s,t ),v ′

, then take the coupling path Qi

> (s,t ),v

,and add all its edges to H(s,t ). Here. P j

> (s,t )

[v − t] denotes the subpath of P j 

> (s,t )

from v to 

t.Readers may refer to Figure 1.1 for an example subgraph H(s,t ). Note, the above construction procedure of the subgraph H(s,t ) runs in polynomial time. Before arguing that H(s,t ) is a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) , let us introduce a notion of nice path . We call an s − t path in H(s,t ) nice if it first follows a outer strand till some vertex u, then take a coupling path to some vertex u′, and finally follows the outer strand on which u′ lies till t. To state it formally, suppose for two paths P and Q, P ◦ Q denotes the concatenation of two paths P and Q.Now, an s − t path in H(s,t ) is nice if and only if it is of the form P i

> (s,t )

[s − u] ◦ Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

◦ P j

> (s,t )

[u′ − t],for some i, j ∈ { 1, 2}, where subpath Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

starts from u and is edge-disjoint with both the outer strands P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t ). ( Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

could be empty.) The following claim shows that H(s,t ) is a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) , and also will be useful in the next subsection while arguing about the correctness of our pairwise 2-FTRS for multiple pairs construction. 

Claim 2.1.1. For any two edges f1, f 2, if there is an s − t path in G \ { f1, f 2}, then there must be a nice s − t path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}.Proof. First of all, one of f1, f 2 must be on P 1(s,t ) and another on P 2(s,t ). Otherwise, since P 1(s,t ) and 

P 2(s,t ) intersect only at s−t cut-edges and s−t cut-vertices, at least one of P 1(s,t ), P 2(s,t ) remains intact in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}, and thus there is nothing to prove. So from now on without loss of generality, assume, f1 = ( x1, y 1) lies on P 1(s,t ) and f2 = ( x2, y 2) lies on P 2(s,t ).Let P be an s−t path in G\{ f1, f 2}. Observe, P must intersect either P 1(s,t )[y1 −t] or P 2(s,t )[y2 −t].Let z′ be the first vertex on P , that is also in V (P 1(s,t )[y1 − t] ∪ P 2(s,t )[y2 − t]) (such a vertex exists 34 because P , P 1(s,t ) and P 2(s,t ) all end at t). Let z′ lie on P j

> (s,t )

, for some j ∈ { 1, 2}. Now consider the last vertex before z′ on P , that is also in V (P 1(s,t ) ∪ P 2(s,t )) (such a vertex exists because P ,

P 1(s,t ) and P 2(s,t ) all start from s), and let z be that vertex which is on P i

> (s,t )

, for some i ∈ { 1, 2}.(i could be equal to j.) Observe, z must lie on the subpath P i

> (s,t )

[s − xi]. Furthermore, P [z − z′]

is edge-disjoint with P 1(s,t ) and P 2(s,t ). Hence, by the construction of H(s,t ), there must be a path 

Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

for some u′ ∈ V (P j

> (s,t )

[z′ − t]) which starts from a vertex u < P i

> (s,t )

z < P i

> (s,t )

xi (u could be equal to z). Hence, P i

> (s,t )

[s − u] remains intact in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. Note, u′ ∈ V (P j

> (s,t )

[yj − t] (because 

u′ ∈ V (P j

> (s,t )

[z′ − t]) ). Thus the subpath P j

> (s,t )

[u′ − t] also remains intact in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. Lastly, since Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

is edge-disjoint with P 1(s,t ) and P 2(s,t ), it also remains intact in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. Hence, we get an s − t path P i

> (s,t )

[s − u] ◦ Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

◦ P j

> (s,t )

[u′ − t] in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}.Next, let us use the above claim to conclude that H(s,t ) is a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) . Furthermore, we also argue that the size of H(s,t ) is O(n).

Lemma 2.1.2. H(s,t ) is a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) and contains O(n) edges. Proof. Since H(s,t ) is a subgraph of G, from Claim 2.1.1, we conclude that for any two edges f1, f 2,there is an s − t path in G \ { f1, f 2} if and only if there is an s − t path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. So, H(s,t )

is a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) .Let us now compute the size of H(s,t ). First, we would like to claim that for each vertex 

v ∈ V (H(s,t )) \ V (P 1(s,t ) ∪ P 2(s,t )), in-degree of v in H(s,t ) is at most 4. If not, then there exists a vertex 

v ∈ V (H(s,t )) \ V (P 1(s,t ) ∪ P 2(s,t )) with at least five incoming edges e1, e 2, e 3, e 4, e 5. Suppose during the construction of H(s,t ), for each r ∈ [5] , er has been included while adding a path Qir 

> (s,t ),v r

, where 

vr ∈ V (P jr

> (s,t )

). Since for each r ∈ [5] , ir, j r ∈ { 1, 2}, by the pigeonhole principle, there must exist 

r̸ = r′ ∈ [5] such that ir = ir′ (= i) and jr = jr′ (= j). Without loss of generality, assume, vr <P js,t 

vr′ .Since Qi 

> (s,t ),v r

and Qi 

> (s,t ),v r′

intersect at v, either ui 

> (s,t ),v r′

= ui 

> (s,t ),v r

or ui 

> (s,t ),v r′

<P i

> (s,t )

ui 

> (s,t ),v r

. Hence, by the Step 3(a) of the construction procedure of H(s,t ), Qir 

> (s,t ),v r

would not be added, which leads to a contradiction. Observe, by the construction of H(s,t ), in-degree of each v ∈ V (P 1(s,t ) ∪ P 2(s,t )) is also at most 4. Hence, H(s,t ) has total O(n) edges. 

# 2.2 Dual Fault-tolerant Pairwise Reachability Preserver 

In this section, we provide the construction of 2-FTRS for multiple pairs, and thus prove Theorem 1. To prove Theorem 1 we provide a construction of 2-FTRS with slack . Let us define it below. 

Sparsifiers with Slack. In case of pairwise FTRS we want to construct an subgraph that provides correct reachability information for all the given vertex-pairs even after edge failures. This is the most standard definition of pairwise FTRS. Next, we define a variant which we refer to as pairwise FTRS with slack . Interested readers may find more works on sparsifiers with slack in [CDG06; KRX +07; Din07; Bod22]. Given a graph G and a pair set P, a subgraph H is a k-FTRS with slack if there is P′ ⊆ P , |P ′| = Ω( |P| ) such that H is a k-FTRS for the pair set P′.35 The following lemma from [Bod22] shows that to construct a k-FTRS for a pair set, it suffices to construct a k-FTRS with slack. 

Lemma 2.2.1 ( [Bod22]) . Let us consider constants α, β, γ > 0 and a parameter p∗. Consider a graph G(V, E ) with n vertices. If 

• There is a k-FTRS of size O(nα) for any vertex-pair set P of size at most p∗, and 

• There is a k-FTRS with slack of size O(nβ |P| γ ) for any vertex-pair set P of size at least p∗,then there is a k-FTRS (G, P) of size at most O(nα + nβ |P| γ ). Moreover, if the k-FTRS for at most p∗ pairs and the k-FTRS with slack for at least p∗ pairs can be computed in polynomial time, then the k-FTRS (G, P) can also be computed in polynomial time. 

Thus, due to Lemma 2.2.1 to prove Theorem 1 it suffices to construct 2-FTRS with slack. To construct that, we need the concept of fractional hitting set .

Fractional Hitting Set. Let U := {1, 2, · · · , n } be the universe. A set S ⊆ U is said to be a 

hitting set of a family of subsets S1, S 2, · · · , S m ⊆ U if and only if for all i ∈ [m], S ∩ Si̸ = ∅ (i.e., S

intersects all the subsets Si). Given a family of subsets, the problem of finding the minimum sized hitting set is referred to the hitting set problem , and is known to be NP-complete. However, there is a simple greedy algorithm that given any family of subsets S1, · · · , S m each of size at least k, finds a hitting set of size at most O( nk log n).In this thesis, we consider a variant of the hitting set problem, which we call fractional hitting set . A set S ⊆ U is said to be a hitting set with slack of a family of subsets S1, · · · , S m if and only if |{ i ∈ [m] | S ∩ Si̸ = ∅}| = Ω( m) (i.e., S has a non-empty intersection with at least a constant fraction of the input subsets). It is not difficult to see that the above mentioned greedy hitting set algorithm finds a fractional hitting set of size at most O(n/k ).

Theorem 13. There is a deterministic algorithm that given a family of subsets S1, · · · , S m ⊆ [n]

each of size at least k, finds a fractional hitting set of size at most O(n/k ) in time O(n+mk + nk log n).Proof. W.l.o.g. assume, each Si is of size exactly k; otherwise we can just consider any k elements from each Si. Let us now consider a slightly modified version of the standard greedy algorithm for the hitting set problem. Initialize F := {S1, · · · , S m}, and S = ∅. For each v ∈ [n], compute the number of subsets in F that contains v, i.e., c(v) := |{ Si ∈ F | v ∈ Si}| . Let vmax be a maximizer of c(v). Include vmax in S, i.e, S ← S ∪ { vmax }. Remove all the subsets that contains vmax from 

F, i.e., F ← F \ { Si | vmax ∈ Si}. Continue this process R = 4 n/k times, and output S. (Note, instead to continuing the process until F = ∅ as in the standard greedy algorithm for the hitting set problem, we terminate after a fixed number of steps.) Clearly, |S| = R = O(n/k ). We would like to claim that S is a fractional hitting set. For that purpose, it suffices to show that at the end of the algorithm |F| ≤ m/ 10 . Let nj denote the size of 

F after the j-th element is added in S. n0 = m, and we need to show that nR ≤ m/ 10 . Consider the step when the j-th element has been added in S. Observe, P 

> v∈[n]\H

c(v) = nj−1k, and thus by a simple averaging, an element vjmax that maximizes c(v) must satisfy c(vjmax ) ≥ nj−1kn−j+1 . Thus, 

nj ≤



1 − kn − j + 1 



nj−1 ≤ m

> j−1

Y

> r=0



1 − kn − r



< m (1 − k/n )j ≤ me −kj/n .

36 Then for R = 4 n/k , nR < m/ 10 .The running time of the modified algorithm is bounded by the standard greedy algorithm for the hitting set problem. For the sake of completeness, let us briefly comment on the running time analysis. At the beginning we can compute the values of c(v)’s, and then store them using any standard heap data structure (e.g. [BLT12]). Then at each step, we extract the max value, and then we update the values of the others. This gives the total time to be O(n + mk + nk log n).

Theorem 14. For any directed graph G = ( V, E ) with n vertices and a set P ⊆ V × V of vertex-pairs, there exists a 2-FTRS with slack having at most O(n4/3|P| 1/3) edges. Furthermore, we can find such a subgraph in polynomial time. 

Now we are ready to describe the construction of 2-FTRS with slack. We will use the notations 

H(s,t ), P i

> (s,t )

, Q j 

> (s,t ),v

defined in Section 2.1. Apart from them, we need a few more notations. 

• freq B (v) denotes the frequency of a vertex in a set of paths B, more elaborately, for any set B of paths in G, for any vertex v ∈ V , freq B (v) denotes the number of paths in B that contains v.

• P [L] : The subpath of the path P containing the first L vertices of P .

• P [−L] : The subpath of the path P containing the last L vertices of P .

Procedure to Construct a 2-FTRS with slack for the input (G, P):

1. For each (s, t ) ∈ P , construct H(s,t ) = 2 -FTRS (G, (s, t )) using the construction provided in Section 2.1. (Recall, H(s,t ) contains two s − t paths P 1(s,t ) and P 2(s,t ), that intersect only at s − t

cut-edges and s − t cut-vertices.) Define Hinter = S 

> (s,t )∈P

H(s,t ).2. Consider the following family of subsets F := {V (P i

> (s,t )

[L]) , V (P i

> (s,t )

[−L]) | i ∈ { 1, 2}, (s, t ) ∈P} , where L = n2/3|P |−1/3. Construct a fractional hitting set S of F (by Theorem 13). Let 

Q := {(s, t ) ∈ P | ∀ i∈{ 1,2}V (P i

> (s,t )

[L]) ∩ S̸ = ∅ and V (P i

> (s,t )

[−L]) ∩ S̸ = ∅}.3. For each v ∈ S, construct a 2-FTRS (G, {v} × V ) and 2-FTRS (G, V × { v}), and take union of all these subgraphs to get a subgraph H1.4. For each (s, t ) ∈ Q and i ∈ { 1, 2}, consider the subpaths P i

> (s,t )

[L] and P i

> (s,t )

[−L]. Let H2 be the graph S

> (s,t )∈P ,i ∈{ 1,2}

(P i

> (s,t )

[L] ∪ P i

> (s,t )

[−L]) .5. Let B be the set of all the paths Qi 

> (s,t ),v

(defined in Section 2.1) for (s, t ) ∈ Q, v ∈

V (∪j∈{ 1,2}P j

> (s,t )

[−L]) and i ∈ { 1, 2}.6. Initialize an empty set W .7. While ∃v ∈ V such that freq B (v) ≥ pL|Q| 

(a) Add v to W and remove all the paths that contains v from B.8. For each w ∈ W , construct a 2-FTRS (G, {w} × V ) and 2-FTRS (G, V × { w}), and take union of all these subgraphs to get a subgraph H3.9. Let H4 be the subgraph obtained by taking the union of all the (remaining) paths in B.10. Return the subgraph H = H1 ∪ H2 ∪ H3 ∪ H4.37 Size of the subgraph H. By Theorem 13, |S| = O(n/L ) = O(( n|P| )1/3). We use Theorem 12 to build a 2-FTRS (G, {v} × V ) and 2-FTRS (G, V × { v}). So the size of H1 is O(( n|P| )1/3 · n). By the construction (Step 4), H2 is of size at most O(L · |P| ).Observe, while defining B (Step 5) before the start of the while loop, we add at most O(L) paths for each (s, t ) ∈ Q . So, |B| = O(L|Q| ). At each iteration of the while loop (Step 7(a)), we remove at least pL|Q| paths from B and add a new vertex in W . At the end of the while loop, for each vertex 

v ∈ V \ W , freq B (v) < pL|Q| . So, at the end of the while loop |W | ≤ O

 L|Q| 

√L|Q|



= O(pL|Q| ).Again, we use Theorem 12 to build a 2-FTRS (G, {w} × V ) and 2-FTRS (G, V × { w}) for each 

w ∈ W . Thus the size of H3 is at most O(npL|Q| ).Since H4 is the union of all the leftover paths in B after the while loop, in-degree of each vertex in H4 is at most pL|Q| . So the size of H4 is O(npL|Q| ). Hence, we conclude that the size of the final subgraph H is O(( n|P| )1/3 · n + L · |Q| + npL|Q| ) = O(n4/3|P |1/3), for L = n2/3|P |−1/3 (note, 

|Q| ≤ |P| ≤ n2). 

Correctness of pairwise 2-FTRS with slack. Next, we would like to claim that the subgraph 

H is a 2-FTRS with slack for (G, P). First, we show that the constructed data structure is a 2-FTRS (G, Q). Second, we show that |Q| = Ω( |P| ). The second part is quite straightforward. By the definition of fractional hitting set, S intersects all but 1/10 fraction of the subsets of F. Hence, 

|Q| ≥ 35 |P| . So it only remains to show the first part. 

Lemma 2.2.2. The subgraph H is a 2-FTRS (G, Q).Proof. Consider any arbitrary pair (s, t ) ∈ Q . It is immediate from the definition of a 2-FTRS that any 2-FTRS (H(s,t ), (s, t )) is also a 2-FTRS (G, (s, t )) . So to prove Lemma 2.2.2, it suffices to show that for all (s, t ) ∈ Q , H is a 2-FTRS (H(s,t ), (s, t )) . From now on we will focus on proving this latter claim. Suppose there is an s − t path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. Observe, by Claim 2.1.1, there must be a nice s − t path R in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2}. By the definition of nice path, R would be of the form 

P i

> (s,t )

[s − u] ◦ Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

◦ P j

> (s,t )

[u′ − t], for some i, j ∈ { 1, 2}, where the subpath Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

starts from the vertex u and is edge-disjoint with P 1(s,t ) and P 2(s,t ). ( Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

could be empty; in that case, R = P i

> (s,t )

for some i ∈ { 1, 2}.) By the definition of Q, P i

> (s,t )

[L] ∩ S̸ = ∅ and P j

> (s,t )

[−L] ∩ S̸ = ∅. Now, if 

u does not lie on P i

> (s,t )

[L], i.e., the length of the subpath P i

> (s,t )

[s − u] is at least L, then R must pass through a vertex v ∈ P i

> (s,t )

[L] ∩ S. Similarly, if u′ does not lie on P j

> (s,t )

[−L], then R must pass through a vertex v ∈ P j

> (s,t )

[−L] ∩ S. In both the scenarios, for some v ∈ S, there is an s − v and 

v − t path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2} (and thus also in G \ { f1, f 2}). This means, by the construction of H1

(Step 3), there is an s − v and v − t path in H1 \ { f1, f 2} as well. So let us now focus on the case when u lies on P i

> (s,t )

[L] and u′ lies on P j

> (s,t )

[−L]. By the construction (Step 4), H2 contains all the edges of P i

> (s,t )

[s − u] and P j

> (s,t )

[u′ − t]. By the construction of the set B (Step 5), Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

belongs to the set B. Then either during the execution of the while loop (Step 7), Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

has been removed due to inclusion of some vertex w ∈ V (Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

) in the set 

W ; or Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

is part of B after the termination of the while loop. For the first case, there is an 

s − w and w − t path in H(s,t ) \ { f1, f 2} (and so in G \ { f1, f 2}), and thus also in H3 \ { f1, f 2} by the construction of H3 (Step 8). In the second case, Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

is included in H4 (Step 9), and hence 38 R = P i

> (s,t )

[s − u] ◦ Qi 

> (s,t ),u ′

◦ P j

> (s,t )

[u′ − t] also exists in H2 ∪ H4 (and thus in H \ { f1, f 2}). This concludes the proof. Let us now combine Theorem 14 with Lemma 2.2.1 to finish the proof of Theorem 1. 

Proof of Theorem 1. For single pair, by [BCR16], we have a 2-FTRS of size O(n) that can be computed in polynomial time. By Theorem 14, we have a 2-FTRS with slack of size O(n4/3|P| 1/3).Theorem now directly follows from Lemma 2.2.1. 39 Chapter 3 

# Closest Fair Clustering with Two Colors 

In this chapter, we present an algorithm to construct a fair clustering F which is 17 -close to an input clustering C, when the irreducible ratio of blue to red vertices is p : 1 for some integer p > 1.More specifically, we prove Theorem 4, which we restate below. 

Theorem 4. Let the vertex set V be partitioned into two disjoint groups, blue and red, where the ratio of blue to red vertices in V is p : 1 for some integer p > 1. Then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes a 17 -close fair clustering with respect to a given input clustering C.

Our approach proceeds in two stages. In the first stage, given an input clustering C, we compute a p-divisible clustering T . In the second stage, we take T as input and produce a fair clustering F.

Definition 3.0.1 (p-Divisible Clustering) . Let V be a set of vertices colored from the set χ =

{c1, . . . , c r}, where the color proportions in V satisfy 

p1 : p2 : · · · : pr = c1(V ) : c2(V ) : · · · : cr(V )

and ci(V ) denotes the number of vertices of color ci in V . A clustering T = {T1, . . . , T m} of V is called a p-divisible clustering if, for every cluster Ti ∈ T and each color cj ∈ χ, the count cj (Ti) of vertices of color cj in Ti is divisible by pj ; that is, pj | cj (Ti).In the special case of two colors—blue and red—where the global ratio of blue to red vertices is 

p : 1 , a p-divisible clustering T ensures that, for every cluster Ti ∈ T , the number of blue vertices 

|blue (Ti) | is a multiple of p. We use the abbreviation pdc to denote a p-divisible clustering. A clustering T is said to be δ-close pdc to an arbitrary unfair clustering D if 

dist( D, T ) ≤ δ · dist( D, T ∗),

where T ∗ denotes the closest pdc to D.Finally, we complement our upper bound result by showing that the problem becomes NP-hard when the ratio between the number of blue and red vertices is p : q with p̸ = q.

# 3.1 Creating a p-divisible clustering. 

In this section, given a clustering C = {C1, . . . , C m} of a set of red-blue colored vertices, where the irreducible ratio of blue to red vertices is p for some integer p > 1, we construct a pdc T =

{T1, T 2, . . . , T ζ }. Our main result for this section is the following: 40 Lemma 3.1.1. There exists a polynomial time algorithm that, given any clustering C on n colored vertices with each vertex having a color either red or blue and a non-negative integer p, finds its 

3.5-close pdc .

We provide the algorithm to find a 3.5-close pdc in Section 3.1.1 and provide the analysis of the algorithm in Section 3.1.2 

3.1.1 Details of the Algorithm 

Before describing our algorithm, let us first introduce a few notations that we use later. For any input cluster Ci, if its number of blue vertices is not a multiple of p, then we define its surplus as the minimum number of blue vertices whose removal makes the number of blue vertices a multiple of p, and we define its deficit as the minimum number of blue vertices whose addition makes the number of blue vertices to be a multiple of p. Formally, we define them as follows. 

• Surplus of Ci, s(Ci): For any cluster Ci ⊆ V , s(Ci) = |blue (Ci) | mod p.

• Deficit of Ci, d(Ci): For any cluster Ci ⊆ V if p ∤ |blue (Ci) | then d(Ci) = p − s(Ci) otherwise 

d(Ci) = 0 .We call the operation of taking some vertices, S (say) from a cluster Ci, that is Ci = Ci \ S

as cut and the operation of merging some vertices M (say) to a cluster Ci that is Ci = Ci ∪ M as 

merge . Let us define some more terms that we need to describe our algorithms. 

• Cut cost, κ(Ci): For any cluster Ci ∈ C , κ(Ci) = ( s(Ci) · (|Ci| − s(Ci)) .

• Merge cost, μ(Ci): For any cluster Ci ∈ C , μ(Ci) = d(Ci) · | Ci|.

Description of the algorithm AlgoforGeneral . Given a clustering, C, we partition the clusters 

Ci ∈ C into two types based on the s(Ci) value of the cluster Ci. If s(Ci) ≤ p/ 2 we call these clusters as cut clusters and if s(Ci) > p/ 2 we call these clusters as merge clusters. Thus 

• cut = {Ci | s(Ci) ≤ p/ 2}.

• merge = {Ci | s(Ci) > p/ 2}.We first sort the clusters Ci ∈ merge based on the value of (κ(Ci) − μ(Ci)) in non-increasing 

order. Our algorithm AlgoforGeneral cuts a set of s(Ci) blue vertices from each cluster Ci ∈ cut 

and merges them to clusters in merge sequentially starting from the beginning in the sorted list. In each cluster Cj ∈ merge , we merge a set of d(Cj ) blue vertices. Now, we have two cases: after a certain vertex of time, the remaining set of clusters in cut becomes empty, and we are only left with some clusters in merge ; in this case, we call our subroutine AlgoforMerge . To remove any ambiguity, we refer to the remaining clusters in merge at this vertex as merge ′, and the set of clusters created from cut after cutting the surplus vertices s(Ci) from each cluster Ci ∈ cut be 

newcut .Another case is when the remaining set of clusters in merge becomes empty, and we are only left with some clusters in cut . In this case, we call our subroutine AlgoforCut . Again, To remove any ambiguity, we refer to the remaining set of clusters in cut as cut ′.41 Description of the Subroutine AlgoforMerge . The subroutine AlgoforMerge takes as input two sets of clusters: newcut and merge ′. Here, newcut denotes the set of clusters that have already become p-divisible after the initial phase of AlgoforGeneral , and merge ′ denotes the remaining clusters from merge whose number of blue vertices is not yet a multiple of p.We begin by computing the total deficit of the clusters in merge ′, defined as 

W = X 

> Cj∈merge ′

d(Cj ).

Intuitively, W represents the total number of blue vertices that must be added (through merging) across all clusters in merge ′ to make them p-divisible. For every cluster Ck ∈ newcut ∪ merge ′, we partition the set of blue vertices blue (Ck) into 

|blue (Ck) | − s(Ck)

p

subsets of size p, and one remaining subset of size s(Ck). We number the subset of size s(Ck) as the 0th subset , and label all other subsets of size p sequentially starting from 1. We denote the zth subset of cluster Ck by Wm,z .Each subset Wm,z is associated with a cutting cost defined as follows: 

κ0(Ck) = s(Ck) · (|Ck| − s(Ck)) , (cost for cutting the 0th subset) , (3.1) 

κz (Ck) = p · (|Ck| − (zp + s(Ck))) , (cost for cutting the zth subset, z ≥ 1).

The subroutine AlgoforMerge is invoked in the situation where only clusters in merge remain non– p-divisible. Ideally, we would prefer to perform merge operations for all clusters in merge ,since for these clusters we have s(Ci) > p/ 2, which implies μ(Ci) < κ (Ci). However, in order to make every cluster Ci ∈ merge satisfy the divisibility condition p | | blue (Ci) |, we must also perform cut operations on some clusters to supply the required blue vertices. Therefore, we choose to cut from clusters Ci that have the smallest difference (κ(Ci) − μ(Ci)) , ensuring that the incurred cutting cost is not disproportionately large relative to their merging benefit. After the main algorithm AlgoforGeneral terminates, all clusters in newcut are already p-divisible. Nevertheless, it may still be more cost-effective to cut subsets of size p from some of these clusters in newcut than from certain clusters in merge ′. This means that the algorithm may cut from the same cluster multiple times if it minimizes the total cost. At each iteration of AlgoforMerge , among all clusters Cℓ ∈ newcut ∪ merge ′, the algorithm selects a cluster Ck with the minimum cost associated with its least uncut subset Wm,v m , where vm

denotes the smallest index corresponding to a subset of size p not yet cut from Ck. The cost of the subset Wm,v m is defined as: 

cost (Wm,v m ) = 

(

κvm (Ck), if vm ≥ 1,κ0(Ck) − μ(Ck), if vm = 0 . (3.2) If multiple clusters have the same minimum cost, the algorithm breaks ties arbitrarily. Let Ck

be the selected cluster. The algorithm then cuts the subset Wm,v m from Ck. If Ck ∈ merge ′, it is subsequently removed from merge ′ and the subset Wm,v m is merged sequentially into the first available clusters in merge ′, which are maintained in non-increasing order of (κ(Ci) − μ(Ci)) .The process continues iteratively until the total deficit W becomes zero. We later prove that exactly W/p subsets need to be cut to eliminate the entire deficit, thereby ensuring that all clusters become p-divisible. 42 Description of the Subroutine AlgoforCut . The subroutine AlgoforCut takes as input the set of clusters cut ′, which represents the remaining clusters in cut after the main algorithm 

AlgoforGeneral terminates. For each cluster Ci ∈ cut ′, the algorithm removes s(Ci) blue ver-tices—corresponding to its surplus—and collects these vertices to form new auxiliary clusters, each of size p. This process is repeated sequentially until, in every cluster Ci ∈ cut ′, the number of blue vertices becomes a multiple of p. As a result, all clusters in the final output satisfy the p-divisibility property. We provide the pseudocode of the algorithms AlgoforGeneral , AlgoforCut , AlgoforMerge 

in Algorithm 4, Algorithm 6 and Algorithm 5 respectively. Let the output of the algorithm 

AlgoforGeneral be T .

Runtime analysis of AlgoforGeneral . The expensive step in the AlgoforGeneral is that in the first step of the algorithm, we sort the clusters in merge which would take 

O (|merge | log( |merge |)) = O(n log n) time. The algorithm uses a vertex v ∈ V at most twice, once while cutting the vertex v from its parent cluster Ci ∈ C (say) and another when merging the vertex v to some cluster Cj̸ = Ci. Hence, the cutting and merging process of the algorithm can take at most O(n) time (recall, |V | = n). In the subroutine AlgoforMerge , at each iteration, the algorithm needs to find the cluster that has the minimum cost attached to its least-numbered subset. The find-Min operation can be done in O(1) by implementing a priority queue with a Fibonacci heap. Hence, overall the time complexity of AlgoforGeneral is O(|merge | log( |merge |) + |V |) = O(n log n).

3.1.2 Approximation Guarantee for AlgoforGeneral 

In this section, we prove that dist( C, T ) ≤ 3.5 dist( C, T ∗) which is stated formally in Lemma 3.1.1 Our proof is divided into the following two cases: 

• Merge case: When P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) ≤ P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ); and 

• Cut case: When P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) > P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ).In Section 3.1.2, we argue that in the merge case dist( C, T ) ≤ 3 dist( C, T ∗).

Lemma 3.1.2. If P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) ≤ P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ), the algorithm AlgoforGeneral produces a 

pdc T such that dist( C, T ) ≤ 3 dist( C, T ∗).

In Section 3.1.2, we argue that in the cut case dist( C, T ) ≤ 3.5 dist( C, T ∗).

Lemma 3.1.3. If P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) > P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ), the algorithm AlgoforGeneral produces a 

pdc T such that dist( C, T ) ≤ 3.5 dist( C, T ∗).

It is straightforward to see that to conclude the proof of Lemma 3.1.1, it suffices to show Lemma 3.1.2 and Lemma 3.1.3. In Section 3.1.2, we discuss some important properties of T ∗ that we need to prove Lemma 3.1.2 and Lemma 3.1.3. In Section 3.1.2 we prove Lemma 3.1.2 and in Section 3.1.2 we prove Lemma 3.1.3. 43 Structure of T ∗

To prove Lemma 3.1.2 and Lemma 3.1.3, we need an important property about the structure of T ∗.We need to define some notations to state that important property of T ∗.Consider any vertex v ∈ V . Suppose in the clustering C, v ∈ Ci, for some i, and in the clustering 

T ∗, v ∈ T ∗ 

> j

, for some j. Note, the number of vertices u such that u ∈ Ci \ T ∗ 

> j

is given by 

X   

> T∗
> k̸=T∗
> j

|Ci ∩ T ∗ 

> k

| (3.3) Similarly the number of vertices u such that u ∈ Ci \ T ∗ 

> j

is given by 

X 

> Ck̸=Ci

Ck ∩ T ∗ 

> j

(3.4) Thus by the definition of the distance function, we have 

dist( C, T ∗) = X

> v∈V

1/2 ·

 X   

> k|T∗
> k̸=T∗
> j

|Ci ∩ T ∗ 

> k

| + X 

> m|Cm̸=Ci

Cm ∩ T ∗

> j

 (3.5) .The 1/2 comes before the expressions 3.3 and 3.4 because when a pair (u, v ) we charge 1/2 for the vertex u and 1/2 for the vertex v. dist( C, T ∗) counts the total number of pairs that are together in C but separated by T ∗ and the pairs that are in different clusters in C but together in T ∗.Let us denote the cost paid by T ∗ for a vertex v ∈ V that belongs to Ci ∈ C for some i and also to T ∗ 

> j

∈ T ∗ for some j by the notation OPT v where 

OPT v = 1 /2 ·

 X   

> k|T∗
> k̸=T∗
> j

|Ci ∩ T ∗ 

> k

| + X 

> m|Cm̸=Ci

Cm ∩ T ∗

> j



.Let us denote the cost paid by T ∗ for a cluster Ci ∈ C by 

OPT Ci = X

> v∈Ci

OPT v

.Now, we are ready to state the important property of T ∗. We show that if for a cluster Ci ∈ C ,if s(Ci) ≤ p/ 2 then 

OPT Ci ≥ s(Ci)( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 12 s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) 

that is T ∗ must pay at least the cost s(Ci)( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 1 /2s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) for the cluster Ci if the surplus of Ci is less than or equal to p/ 2.Again if s(Ci) > p/ 2 then 

OPT Ci ≥ (p − s(Ci))( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 12 s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) 

44 that is T ∗ must pay at least the cost (p − s(Ci))( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 12 s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) for the cluster 

Ci if the surplus of Ci is greater than p/ 2.We state this formally in the following lemma. 

Lemma 3.1.4. For a cluster Ci ∈ C we have 1. if s (Ci) ≤ p/ 2 then OPT Ci ≥ s(Ci)( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 12 s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) .2. if s (Ci) > p/ 2 then OPT Ci ≥ (p − s(Ci))( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 12 s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) .

For proving Lemma 3.1.4, we need the help of the following propositions. 

Proposition 3.1.5. Consider any integer p ≥ 2, and α1, . . . , α t ∈ [p], for t ≥ 1. Let s = Pti=1 αi

mod p. Then Pti=1 αi (p − αi) ≥ s (p − s).Proof. Suppose, (α1 + α2) mod p = s1, hence (α1 + α2) = kp + s1 where k ∈ { 0, 1}.First, we prove 

α1(p − α1) + α2(p − α2) ≥ s1(p − s1)

Now, 

α1(p − α1) + α2(p − α2)= α1p − α21 + α2p − α22

= p(α1 + α2) − (α1 + α2)2 + 2 α1α2

= p(kp + s1) − (kp + s1)2 + 2 α1α2 (Replacing (α1 + α2) with (kp + s1)) = ( kp + s1) ( p − (kp + s1)) + 2 α1α2 (3.6) Case 1: When k = 0 then Eq. (3.6) becomes 

s1(p − s1) + 2 α1α2 ≥ s1(p − s1)

Case 2: When k = 1 then Eq. (3.6) becomes 

(p + s1)( −s1) + 2 α1α2

= ( p − s1)s1 + 2( α1α2 − s1p)= ( p − s1)s1 + 2(( s1p + r(p − r − s1)) − s1p)(Replacing α1 with (p − r) and α2 with (s1 + r)) = ( p − s1)s1 + 2(( s1p + r(p − α2)) − s1p)

≥ (p − s1)s1 (as α2 ∈ [p]) 

Hence, we get 

α1(p − α1) + α2(p − α2) ≥ s1(p − s1) (where s1 = ( α1 + α2) mod p) (3.7) Now, 45 tX

> i=1

αi (p − αi) = α1(p − α1) + α2(p − α2) + 

> t

X

> i=3

αi(p − αi)

≥ s1(p − s1) + α3(p − α3) + 

> t

X

> i=4

αi(p − αi)(using Eq. (3.7) , assume s1 = ( α1 + α2) mod p)

≥ s2(p − s2) + α4(p − α4) + 

> t

X

> i=5

αi(p − αi)(using Eq. (3.7) , assume s2 = ( s1 + α3) mod p)

...

≥ s(p − s) (Proved )

Proposition 3.1.6. Given positive integers n, p, and x1, x 2, . . . , x t such that n = x1 + x2 + · · · + xt.Let b, b 1, b 2, . . . , b t < p be nonnegative integers satisfying b ≤ n, bi ≤ xi, and b = ( b1 + b2 + · · · + bt)( mod p). Let qi = p − bi( mod p). Consider A = P 

> i<j

xixj + Pti=1 (xi − bi)qi. Then 1. If b ≤ p/ 2, then A ≥ b(n − b).2. If b > p/ 2, then A ≥ (p − b)( n − b).Proof. Without loss of generality, assume that x1 ≤ x2 ≤ · · · ≤ xt.(1) Suppose that b ≤ p/ 2. We show that A ≥ b(n − b).As xt = max {xi}, it follows that A ≥ P 

> i<j

xixj = Pti=1 xi

 n − xi

2



≥ n

 n − xt

2



. Addition-ally, A ≥ xt(n − xt) + ( xt − bt)qt. Let B = n

 n − xt

2



, and C = xt(n − xt) + ( xt − bt)qt. Then 

A ≥ B and A ≥ C. Therefore, it suffices so that B ≥ b(n − b) or C ≥ b(n − b). We proceed by cases. 

Case 1 : xt ≤ b.

• If n ≤ xt + b, then C − b(n − b) > x t(n − xt) − b(n − b) = ( xt − b)( n − xt − b) ≥ 0.

• If n > x t + b, then 

B − b(n − b) = 12 (n(n − xt) − 2b(n − b)) 

≥ 12 (n(n − xt) − b(n − b) − b(n − xt)) (as b ≥ xt)= 12 (n − b)( n − xt − b)

≥ 0. (as n ≥ b and n > x t + b)

Case 2: xt > b .46 • If n ≥ xt + b, then C − b(n − b) > x t(n − xt) − b(n − b) = ( xt − b)( n − xt − b) ≥ 0.

• If n < x t + b, then b > n − xt = x1 + x2 + · · · + xt−1 ≥ b1 + b2 + · · · + bt−1. Note that 

b = ( b1 + b2 + · · · + bt)( mod p). It follows that bt = b − (b1 + b2 + · · · + bt−1)( mod p) = 

b − (b1 + b2 + · · · + bt−1). Hence, 0 < b t < b and qt = p − bt( mod p) = p − bt > p − b ≥ b, as 

b ≤ p/ 2. This leads to 

C − b(n − b) = ( xt − b)( n − xt − b) + ( xt − bt)qt

> (xt − b)( n − xt − b) + ( xt − b)qt (as bt < b )= ( xt − b)( n − xt − b + qt)

≥ 0. (as xt ≥ b, n ≥ xt, and qt > b )

(2) Suppose that b > p/ 2. We show that A ≥ (p − b)( n − b) = a(n − b), where a = p − b ≤ p/ 2 < b .As before, we have A ≥ B and A ≥ C, where B = n

 n − xt

2



, and C = xt(n − xt) + ( xt − bt)qt.Similarly, we proceed by cases. 

Case 1: xt ≤ a.

• If n ≤ xt + a, then C − a(n − b) ≥ xt(n − xt) − a(n − a) = ( xt − a)( n − xt − a) ≥ 0.

• If n > x t + a, then 

B − a(n − b) ≥ 12 (n(n − xt) − 2a(n − a)) 

≥ 12 (n(n − xt) − a(n − a) − a(n − xt)) (as a ≥ xt)= ( n − a)( n − xt − a)

≥ 0. (as n ≥ a and n ≥ xt + a).

Case 2: xt > a .

• If n ≥ xt + a, then C − a(n − b) ≥ xt(n − xt) − a(n − a) = ( xt − a)( n − xt − a) ≥ 0.

• If n < x t + a, then a > n − xt = x1 + x2 + · · · + xt−1 ≥ b1 + b2 + · · · + bt−1. Note that b = ( b1 + b2 + · · · + bt)( mod p). It follows that bt = b − (b1 + b2 + · · · + bt−1)( mod p) = b − (b1 + b2 + · · · + bt−1). Hence, 0 < b t < b , and qt = p − bt( mod p) = p − bt.Therefore, qt = p − b + b1 + b2 + . . . b t−1 ≥ p − b = a. If bt ≤ a, it follows that 

C − a(n − b) ≥ xt(n − xt) + ( xt − bt)qt − a(n − b)

≥ (xt − a)( n − xt − a) − (xt − a)qt (as bt < a )= ( xt − a)( n − xt + qt − a)

≥ 0. (as xt > a, n ≥ xt and qt ≥ a)

It remains to consider bt > a . We have 

C − a(n − b)= ( xt(n − xt) − bt(n − a) + xt(bt − a)) + bt(n − a) − xt(bt − a) + ( xt − bt)qt − a(n − b)

47 = ( xt − bt)( n − xt − a) + ( bt − a)( n − xt) + a(b − bt) + ( xt − bt)qt

≥ (xt − bt)( n − xt − a + qt) + ( bt − a)( n − xt) + a(b − bt)

≥ 0.

This concludes the proof. Now we are ready to prove Lemma 3.1.4 

Proof of Lemma 3.1.4. Suppose in T ∗, the cluster Ci is split into t parts Xi, 1, . . . , X i,t ; more specif-ically, 

• Ci = Stj=1 Xi,j , and 

• ∀j̸ = k ∈ [t], Xi,j ∩ Xi,k = ∅.For each part Xi,j , consider a set Si,j ⊆ Xi,j that consists of (blue (Xi,j ) mod p) many blue vertices. Now, since T ∗ is a pdc we get for the clusters Xi,k for k ∈ { 1, . . . , t } at least (p − | Si,k |) blue vertices from clusters other than Ci must be merged. Let, these set of (p − | Si,k |) blue vertices be S′

> i,k

.Hence we get, 

OPT Ci ≥ X

> j<k

|Xi,j || Xi,k | +

> t

X

> k=1

|Xi,k \ Si,k || S′

> i,k

| + 1 /2

> t

X

> k=1

|Si,k || S′

> i,k

| (3.8) Note that 

> t

X

> k=1

|Si,k | mod p = si recall s(Ci) = si

Hence, from Proposition 3.1.5 we get, 

1/2

> t

X

> k=1

|Si,k || S′

> i,k

|

= 1 /2

> t

X

> k=1

|Si,k |(p − | Si,k |)

≥ 1/2 si · (p − si) (3.9) It suffices to show that 

X

> j<k

|Xi,j || Xi,k | +

> t

X

> k=1

|Xi,k \ Si,k || S′

> i,k

| ≥ s(Ci)( |Ci| − s(Ci)) , (3.10) when s(Ci) ≤ p/ 2, and 

X

> j<k

|Xi,j || Xi,k | +

> t

X

> k=1

|Xi,k \ Si,k || S′

> i,k

| ≥ (p − s(Ci))( |Ci| − s(Ci)) , (3.11) when s(Ci) > p/ 2.To this end, we let |Ci| = n, s(Ci) = b < p , |Xi,j | = xj , |Si,j | = bj < p , and |S′ 

> i,j

| = qj . Then, 

n = x1 + x2 + . . . x t, b = ( b1 + b2 + · · · + bt)( mod p), qj = ( p − bj )( mod p), and xj ≥ bj , for all 

j. This allows us to apply Proposition 3.1.6, which claims the correctness of (3.10) and (3.11). 48 Approximation guarantee in the merge case 

In this section, we prove that if P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) ≤ P 

> Ci∈merge

d(Ci), that is in the merge case, the distance between input clustering C and the output clustering T of the algorithm AlgoforGeneral ,

dist( C, T ) is at most 3 dist( C, T ∗). let us restate it formally below. 

Lemma 3.1.2. If P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) ≤ P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ), the algorithm AlgoforGeneral produces a 

pdc T such that dist( C, T ) ≤ 3 dist( C, T ∗).

To prove Lemma 3.1.2, here we need to recall and also define some costs paid by our algorithm 

AlgoforGeneral . For a cluster Tk ∈ T we define π(Tk) as a parent of Tk iff π(Tk) ∈ C and Tk is formed either by cutting some vertices from π(Tk) or by merging some vertices to π(Tk).

• cut-algo : The set of clusters Ci ∈ C from where the algorithm has cut some blue vertices. 

• merge-algo : The set of clusters Ci ∈ C to where the algorithm has merged some blue vertices. We have merge-algo = C \ cut-algo .

• Cost of cutting the zth subset of size p from Ci where z ∈ { 0, . . . , (|blue (Ci) | − si)/p }:

– κ0(Ci) = si(|Ci| − si).

– For z ∈ { 1, . . . , (|blue (Ci) | − si)/p }: κz (Ci) = p (|Ci| − (si + zp )) .Let yi,z take the value 1 if the algorithm cuts the zth subset from Ci. Hence, we define 

cost 1(T ) = X

> Ci∈cut-algo
> t

X

> z=0

yi,z κz (Ci) (3.12) 

• Cost of merging in a cluster Cj which is μ(Cj ). Hence, we define 

cost 2(T ) = X 

> Cj∈merge-algo

d(Cj )|Cj | (3.13) 

• Inter-cluster cost paid by the vertices that belong to a subset of size p of Ci that we cut from 

Ci in the algorithm AlgoforMerge :

– (Intercluster cost) cost 3(T ): P 

> Tk∈T

|(Tk \ π(Tk)) \ Ci|| (Tk \ π(Tk)) ∩ Ci|.If the algorithm AlgoforGeneral cuts a subset Wi,z from a cluster Ci then we can upper bound cost 3(T ) by 

cost 3(T ) ≤ | Wi,z |(p − | Wi,z |) (3.14) 

• Intracluster cost within the vertices that belong to a subset of size p of Ci that we cut from 

Ci in the algorithm AlgoforMerge :

– (Intracluster cost) cost 4(T ): P   

> Tk,T j∈T
> k̸=j

|(Tk \ π(Tk)) ∩ Ci|| (Tj \ π(Tj )) ∩ Ci)|.49 If the algorithm AlgoforGeneral cuts a subset Wi,z from a cluster Ci and it further gets split into parts W (1)  

> i,z

, W (2)  

> i,z

, . . . , W (t) 

> i,z

then we can upper bound cost 4(T ) by 

cost 4(T ) ≤ 12

> t

X

> j=1

|W (k) 

> i,z

|(|Wi,z | − | W (k) 

> i,z

|) (3.15) Now we prove the following claim that we need to prove Lemma 3.1.2. 

Claim 3.1.7. Suppose in T ∗, a cluster Ci ∈ C gets split into t parts Xi, 1, X i, 2, . . . , X i,t more specifically, 

• Xi,j ⊆ T ∗ 

> rj

for some T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗.

• Ci = tS

> j=1

Xi,j and 

• Xi,j ∩ Xi,k = ∅ ∀j̸ = k.then 1. Either ∃j ∈ [t], such that Xi,j = T ∗ 

> rj

(for some T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗) and red (Ci) ⊆ Xi,j and |Xi,ℓ | < p 

∀ ℓ̸ = j.2. or |Xi,ℓ | < p , ∀ ℓ ∈ [t].

Now, to prove the previous claim, we need to prove the other claims below. 

Claim 3.1.8. Consider a partition Xi,j of Ci. Suppose, Xi,j ⊆ T ∗ 

> rj

(for some T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗) then 

|T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | ≤ si,j where si,j = |blue (Xi,j ) | mod p.Proof. Suppose for a partition Xi,j , |T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | > s i,j . To prove this first we construct M from T ∗

such that dist( C, M) < dist( C, T ∗). This would contradict the fact that T ∗ is the closest pdc and thus we will conclude |T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | ≤ si,j .

Construction of M from T ∗: M = T ∗ \ { T ∗ 

> rj

} ∪ { (Xi,j \ Si,j ), (T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j \ Si,j )) }.That is M we remove the set T ∗ 

> rj

from T ∗ and add two sets (Xi,j \ Si,j ) and (T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j \ Si,j )) 

where Si,j ⊆ blue (Xi,j ) such that |Si,j | = si,j .Note that, 

dist( C, M) = dist( C, T ∗) + |Xi,j \ Si,j || Si,j | − | Xi,j \ Si,j || T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j |

This is because, 

• Reason behind the term |Xi,j \ Si,j || Si,j | : The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ (Xi,j \ Si,j )

and v ∈ Si,j are not counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in the same clusters 

Ci ∈ C and T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v belongs to different clusters (Xi,j \ Si,j )

and (T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j \ Si,j )) respectively, hence, these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).50 • Reason behind the term |Xi,j \Si,j || T ∗ 

> rj

\Xi,j | : The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ (Xi,j \Si,j )

and v ∈ T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because such pairs u and v are present in the different clusters in C but in the same cluster T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v

belongs to different clusters (Xi,j \ Si,j ) and (T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j \ Si,j )) respectively, hence, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).Now, 

dist( C, M) = dist( C, T ∗) + |Xi,j \ Si,j || Si,j | − | Xi,j \ Si,j || T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j |

< dist( C, T ∗) + |Xi,j \ Si,j |si,j − | Xi,j \ Si,j |si,j (as |Si,j | = si,j and |T ∗ \ Xi,j | > s i,j ).

= dist( C, T ∗).

Claim 3.1.9. There exists at most one partition Xi,j such that |Xi,j | ≥ p

Proof. Let us assume there exists two partitions Xi,j and Xi,j ′ such that |Xi,j | ≥ p, |Xi,j ′ | ≥ p and 

Xi,j ⊆ T ∗ 

> rj

and Xi,j ′ ⊆ T ∗ 

> rj′

for some T ∗ 

> rj

and T ∗

> r′
> j

in T ∗.Without loss of generality, assume, |T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | ≤ | T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ |. Now we construct M from T ∗ in such a way that dist( C, M) < dist( C, T ∗) which is a contradiction, and thus we will conclude that there exists at most one partition Xi,j such that |Xi,j | ≥ p.

Construction of M from T ∗ :

M = T ∗ \

n

T ∗ 

> rj

, T ∗

> rj′

o

∪

n 

T ∗ 

> rj

∪ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



,



T ∗ 

> rj′

\ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )

o 

That is in M we remove sets T ∗ 

> rj

and T ∗ 

> rj′

from T ∗ and add two sets 



T ∗ 

> rj

∪ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



and 



T ∗ 

> rj′

\ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



where Si,j ′ ⊆ blue  Xi,j ′

 such that |Si,j ′ | = ( blue  Xi,j ′

 mod p).Note that, 

dist( C, M) = dist( C, T ∗) + |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | + |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| Si,j ′ |−| (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ | − | (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| Xi,j |

This is because 

• The reason behind the term |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j |: The pairs (u, v ) such that 

u ∈ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ ) and v ∈ T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j are not counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in different clusters both in C and T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v belong to the same cluster 



T ∗ 

> rj

∪ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



. Hence, these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).

• The reason behind the term |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| Si,j ′ |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ (Xi,j ′ \

Si,j ′ ) and v ∈ Si,j ′ are not counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in the same clusters Ci ∈ C and T ∗ 

> rj′

∈ T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v belongs to different clusters 



T ∗ 

> rj

∪ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



and 



T ∗ 

> rj′

\ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



respectively. Hence, these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).51 • The reason behind the term |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ |: The pairs (u, v ) such that 

u ∈ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ ) and v ∈ T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because such pairs u and 

v are present in the different clusters in C but in the same cluster T ∗ 

> rj′

∈ T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v belongs to different clusters 



T ∗ 

> rj

∪ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



and 



T ∗ 

> rj′

\ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



respectively. Hence, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).

• The reason behind the term |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| Xi,j |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ (Xi,j ′ \

Si,j ′ ) and v ∈ Xi,j are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because such pairs u and v are present in the same cluster Ci ∈ C but in different clusters in T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v belongs to same cluster 



T ∗ 

> rj

∪ (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )



. Hence, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).Now, 

dist( C, M) = dist( C, T ∗) + |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | + |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| Si,j ′ |− | (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ | − | (Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|| Xi,j |

= dist( C, T ∗) + |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|



|T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | − | T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ |



+ |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|  |Si,j ′ | − | Xi,j |

< dist( C, T ∗) + |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|



|T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | − | T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ |



+ |(Xi,j ′ \ Si,j ′ )|  |Si,j ′ | − p

(as |Xi,j | ≥ p)

< dist( C, T ∗)(as |T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | ≤ | T ∗ 

> rj′

\ Xi,j ′ | and |Si,j ′ | < p ).

Now from Claim 3.1.9, we get that there exists at most one partition Xi,j such that |Xi,j | ≥ p

the following claims are related to the partition Xi,j . Recall each partition Xi,ℓ ⊆ T ∗ 

> rℓ

for all ℓ ∈ [t]

where T ∗ 

> rℓ

∈ T ∗.

Claim 3.1.10. |blue S

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

!

| ≥ (p − si,j )

Proof. Suppose for contradiction, 

|blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 | < (p − si,j )

Now we prove, 

|blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 | < (p − si,j ) ⇒ | blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 | = si − si,j 

|blue (Xi,j ) | + |blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 |

 mod p = si.

52 ⇒ | blue (Xi,j ) | mod p + |blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 | mod p = si.

⇒ si,j + |blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 | mod p = si.

⇒ | blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 | mod p = si − si,j (3.16) Since, |blue S

> ℓ̸=j

!

Xi,ℓ | < (p − si,j ) and due to Eq. (3.16) we have 

|blue 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 | = si − si,j 

Now we prove if |blue 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



| = si − si,j then there exists a clustering M such that 

dist( C, M) < dist( C, T ∗) which is a contradiction and thus we conclude our claim which is 

|blue S

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

!

| ≥ (p − si).

Construction of M from T ∗

Note that since blue 



T ∗

> rj



mod p = 0 and by Claim 3.1.8 we get |T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | ≤ si,j 

thus 

|blue 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



| = p − si,j > s i − si,j 

Let Y ⊆ blue 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



such that |Y | = si − si,j .Here, the construction of M from T ∗ is a bit more involved, so first, we provide an informal description of the construction, and then we give the formal description. Recall, the cluster Ci is split into t partitions Xi, 1, X i, 2, . . . , X i,t in T ∗. Among these partitions 

|Xi,j | ≥ p and each of these partitions Xi,ℓ ⊆ T ∗ 

> rℓ

for some T ∗ 

> rℓ

∈ T ∗.While constructing M from T ∗ we do the following steps 1. Divide Y into (t − 1) disjoint parts Y1, Y 2, . . . , Y j−1, Y j+1 , . . . , Y t such that 

• |Yℓ| = |blue (Xi,ℓ ) | ∀ ℓ̸ = j and 

• S 

> ℓ̸=j

Yℓ = Y

2. Remove t clusters T ∗ 

> rℓ

for all ℓ ∈ [t] from T ∗.3. Add t new clusters to M

• First cluster : Ci ∪ (T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y )) 

53 • Remaining (t − 1) clusters : (T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ ) ∪ Yℓ) ∀ℓ̸ = j.We move the red vertices of Xi,ℓ for all ℓ̸ = j to the set T ∗ 

> rj

.The main part of the above construction is that we have divided Y into (t − 1) disjoint parts 

Y1, Y 2, . . . , Y j−1, Y j+1 , . . . , Y t such that |Yℓ| = |blue (Xi,ℓ ) | ∀ ℓ̸ = j. After that, we swap the vertices in blue (Xi,ℓ ) with the vertices in Yℓ.Formally, 

M = T ∗ \ { T ∗ 

> rℓ

| ℓ̸ = j} ∪ 

n 

Ci ∪



T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y )

 

,    T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ 

 ∪ Yℓ

 | ℓ̸ = j

o

where Yℓ ⊆ Y such that 

• |Yℓ| = |blue (Xi,ℓ ) | ∀ ℓ̸ = j and 

• Ym ∩ Yn = ∅ ∀m̸ = n and m, n ∈ [t].

• S 

> ℓ̸=j

Yℓ = Y .Note that, 

dist( C, M) = dist( C, T ∗) + [

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y ) + |Y | T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y ) + X

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ|| T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ |− [

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ |Xi,j | − | Y || Xi,j | − X

> ℓ̸=j

|blue (Xi,ℓ ) || T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ |

This is because 

• Reason behind the term S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y ) : The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ and v ∈ T ∗ 

> rj

\(Xi,j ∪Y ) are not be counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in different clusters both in C and T ∗. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the same cluster, these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).

• Reason behind the term |Y || T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y )|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Y and 

v ∈ T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y ) may not be counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in same clusters both in C and T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the different clusters, these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).

• Reason behind the term P 

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ|T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Yℓ and 

v ∈ T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ are not be counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in different clusters both in C and T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v belong to the same cluster T ∗

> rℓ

these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).

• Reason behind the term S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ |Xi,j |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Xi,j and v ∈ Y

are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in different clusters T ∗ but present in the same cluster in Ci ∈ C . In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the same cluster, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).54 • Reason behind the term |Y || Xi,j |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Y and v ∈ Xi,j are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in same cluster T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗ but present in different clusters in C. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the different clusters, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).

• Reason behind the term P 

> ℓ̸=j

|blue (Xi,ℓ ) || T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈

blue (Xi,ℓ ) and v ∈ T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in same cluster T ∗ but present in different clusters in C. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the different clusters, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).Now, 

dist( C, M) = dist( C, T ∗) + [

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y ) + |Y | T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y ) + X

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ|T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ |− [

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ |Xi,j | − | Y || Xi,j | − X

> ℓ̸=j

|blue (Xi,ℓ ) || T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Xi,ℓ |

< dist( C, T ∗)(by Claim 3.1.8 we have T ∗ 

> rj

\ (Xi,j ∪ Y ) = si,j and |Xi,j | > p )

Claim 3.1.11. Xi,j = T ∗ 

> rj

(for some T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗). Proof. Suppose for contradiction Xi,j ⊂ T ∗ 

> rj

. at first we prove red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



= ∅.Suppose red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 

̸

= ∅ then we construct M from T ∗ such that dist( C, M) < dist( C, T ∗)

which is a contradiction and thus it will conclude red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



= ∅.

Construction of M from T ∗

M = T ∗ \ { T ∗ 

> j

} ∪ 

n 

T ∗ 

> j

\ red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 

 

, red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 

o 

That is in M we remove the set T ∗ 

> j

from T ∗ and add sets 



T ∗ 

> j

\ red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 

 

and 

red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



.Note that, 

dist( C, M) = dist( C, T ∗) + |red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



|| blue 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



| − | red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



|| Xi,j |

This is because 

• Reason behind the term |red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



|| blue 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



| : The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



and v ∈ blue 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



are not counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u

55 and v are present in same clusters both in C and T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗. In M, since, these pairs u and v

belong to the different clusters red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



and 



T ∗ 

> j

\ red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 

 

respectively thus these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).

• Reason behind the term |red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



|| Xi,j | : The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈

red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



and v ∈ Xi,j are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in the same cluster T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗ but present in different clusters in C. In M, since these pairs u and v

belong to the different clusters, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).Now, we have proved that red 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



= ∅. We also know that |blue 



T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j 



| = ( p−si,j )

thus |T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j | = ( p − si,j ). From Claim 3.1.10 we get that |blue S

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

!

| ≥ (p − si,j ). Let 

Y ⊆ blue S

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

!

such that |Y | = ( p − si,j ).To prove Xi,j = T ∗ 

> rj

(for some T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗) we construct M from T ∗ by swapping the vertices present in Y with the vertices in T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j . After that, we prove dist( C, M) < dist( C, T ∗).

Construction of M from T ∗ : Suppose Yℓ = Y ∩ Xi,ℓ ∀ℓ̸ = j. We divide T ∗ 

> rj

\ Xi,j into subsets of small size Z1, . . . , Z t such that |Zℓ| = |Yℓ| ∀ ℓ̸ = j.

M = T ∗ \ T ∗ 

> rk

k ∈ { 1, . . . , t } ∪ (Xi,j ∪ Y ), (T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ Yℓ ∀ℓ̸ = j) .Note that, 

dist( C, M) < dist( C, T ∗)+

p X

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ| + p X

> ℓ̸=j

|Zℓ| + X

> ℓ1<ℓ 2

|Zℓ1 || Zℓ2 |



−

|Xi,j | X

> ℓ̸=j

|Zℓ| + |Xi,j | X

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ| + X

> ℓ1<ℓ 2

|Yℓ1 || Yℓ2 |

 (3.17) 

• Reason behind the terms p P 

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ| and p P 

> ℓ̸=j

|Zℓ|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Yℓ

and v ∈ Xi,ℓ for ℓ̸ = j are not counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in the same clusters both in T ∗ and C. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the different clusters, these pairs are counted in dist( C, M). Since, |Xi,ℓ | ≤ p for ℓ̸ = j thus we have the term 

p P 

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ|.Again, since The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Zℓ and v ∈ Xi,ℓ for ℓ̸ = j are not counted in 

dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in different clusters both in T ∗ and C. In M, since, these pairs u and v belong to the same cluster these pairs are counted in dist( C, M) and thus we have the term p P 

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ|.

• Reason behind the term P 

> ℓ1<ℓ 2

|Zℓ1 || Zℓ2 | : The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Zℓ1 and 

v ∈ Zℓ2 are not counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in the same clusters both 56 in T ∗ and C. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the different clusters, these pairs are counted in dist( C, M).

• Reason behind the terms |Xi,j | P 

> ℓ̸=j

|Zℓ| and |Xi,j | P 

> ℓ̸=j

|Yℓ|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Xi,j and v ∈ Zℓ are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in the same cluster T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗ but present in different clusters in C. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the different clusters, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).Similarly, the pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Xi,j and v ∈ Yℓ are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u

and v are present in different clusters in T ∗ but present in the same cluster in C. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the same cluster, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).

• Reason behind the term P 

> ℓ1<ℓ 2

|Yℓ1 || Yℓ2 | : The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Yℓ1 and v ∈ Yℓ2

are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because u and v are present in different clusters in T ∗ but in same cluster in C. In M, since these pairs u and v belong to the same cluster, these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M).

Claim 3.1.12. red (Ci) ⊆ Xi,j .Proof. Suppose not then red 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

̸

= ∅

Construction of M from T ∗ :

M = T ∗ \ T ∗ 

> rℓ

(red (Ci) ∩ T ∗ 

> rℓ

)̸ = ∅ ∪

(

T ∗ 

> rj

∪ red S

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

!! 

,  T ∗ 

> rℓ

\ red (Ci) i̸ = ℓ)

Note that, 

dist( C, M) < dist( C, T ∗) + p red 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 

 − | Xi,j | red 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



< dist( C, T ∗) (as |Xi,j | > p )

• Reason behind the term p red 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈

red 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



and v ∈ bigcup ℓ̸=j Xi,ℓ are not counted in dist( C, T ∗) because these pairs 

u and v lie in the same cluster for both C and T ∗ but since these pairs are present in different clusters in M they are counted in dist C, M. Now, since we know that for all ℓ̸ = j, |Xi,ℓ | ≤ p

hence the total cost paid for these pairs is at most p |red 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



|.

• Reason behind the term |Xi,j | red 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Xi,j and 

v ∈ red 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



are counted in dist( C, T ∗) because these pairs u and v lie in the different clusters in T ∗ but same cluster in C. In M, since these pairs lie in the same cluster, these pairs are not counted in dist C, M. Now, since in Claim 3.1.11 we proved that Xi,j = T ∗ 

> rj

there is no other cost paid by the algorithm for merging the vertices of red 

S 

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ 



to Xi,j .57 Now, we are ready to prove Claim 3.1.7 

Proof of Claim 3.1.7. From Claim 3.1.11 we get that Xi,j = T ∗ 

> rj

, from Claim 3.1.12 we get red (Ci) ⊆

Xi,j and from Claim 3.1.9 we get |Xi,ℓ | < p ∀ ℓ̸ = j. Thus, (i) is true. If such a partition Xi,j does not exist, then (ii ) is true. Hence, either (i) is true or (ii ) is true. We also need Claim 3.1.13 and Claim 3.1.17 to prove Lemma 3.1.2. 

Claim 3.1.13. Suppose yi,j takes the value 1 if we cut the jth subset from a cluster Ci in the subroutine AlgoforMerge otherwise 0. Then 

X

> Ci∈cut-algo



> n

X

> j=1

yi,j κj (Ci) + yi, 0 κ0(Ci) − μ(Ci)

 + X

> Ci∈C

μ(Ci) ≤ dist( C, T ∗).

Proof. From Claim 3.1.7 we get that if in T ∗, Ci gets split into Xi, 1, . . . , X i,t that is 

• Xi,j ⊆ T ∗ 

> k

(for some T ∗ 

> k

∈ T ∗) ∀j ∈ [t].

• Xi,j 1 ∩ Xi,j 2 = ∅ for j1̸ = j2 and j1, j 2 ∈ [t].

• S

> j∈[t]

Xi,j = Ci.then 1. Either ∃j ∈ [t], such that Xi,j = T ∗ 

> rj

(for some T ∗ 

> rj

∈ T ∗) and red (Ci) ⊆ Xi,j and |Xi,ℓ | < p 

∀ ℓ̸ = j.2. or |Xi,ℓ | < p ∀ ℓ ∈ [t].This implies 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ mod p = si

Hence, 

[

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ = ap + si for some constant a.Let us partition the set blue (Ci) into subsets Wi, 0, W i, 1, . . . , W i,m such that m =(|blue (Ci) | − si) /p where |Wi, 0| = si and |Wi,z | = p for all z > 0.If S

> ℓ̸=j

Xi,ℓ = ap + si then we say T ∗ has cut (a + 1) subsets Wi, 0, W i, 1, . . . , W i,a from Ci.Now since |Xi,ℓ | < p ∀ℓ̸ = j hence the pair (u, v ) such that u ∈ Wi,z 1 and v ∈ Wi,z 2 for z1̸ = z2

must be counted in dist( C, T ∗).Hence, the cost of 58 1. Cutting Wi, 0 from Ci is : κ0(Ci) = si(|Ci| − si)

2. Cutting Wi,z from Ci for z > 0 is : κz (Ci) = p(|Ci| − (zp + si)) .Recall in T ∗, Ci gets split into Xi, 1, . . . , X i,t . We say a cluster Ci ∈ C also belongs to a set 

cut-OPT (say) if t > 1; otherwise, it belongs to a set merge-OPT (say). Informally, T ∗ has cut some vertices from the clusters Ci ∈ cut-OPT and merged some vertices to the clusters 

Ci ∈ merge-OPT .

T ∗ must pay the minimum cost for cutting from the clusters that belong to cut-OPT and merging to the clusters in merge-OPT . More specifically, 

dist( C, T ∗) ≥ min X

> Ci∈cut-OPT
> m

X

> z=0

xi,z κz (Ci) + X

> Ci∈merge-OPT

μ(Ci)

subject to 

xi,z ≤ xi,z ′ for z > z ′ (3.18) 

X

> Ci∈C
> m

X

> z=0

xi,z = Wg

p where Wg = X

> Ci∈merge

d(Ci) (3.19) 

xi,z ∈ { 0, 1} (3.20) Here, m = ( |blue (Ci) | − si)/p and xi,z takes the value 1 if T ∗ cuts the subset Wi,z from a cluster Ci otherwise 0. Constraint Eq. (3.18) denotes that if T ∗ cuts a subset Wi,z then it must cut all subsets Wi,z ′ such that z′ < z . Constraint Eq. (3.19) denotes that T ∗ cuts exactly Wg/p such subsets where Wg is the sum of the deficits of all clusters that belong to merge . Note the difference between the notations W = P 

> Ci∈merge ′

d(Ci) which is used in our subroutine AlgoforMerge and the notation Wg = P 

> Ci∈merge

d(Ci). Since here, we are analyzing the algorithm AlgoforGeneral ,we are using Wg instead of W .Now, we prove two claims that explain the second constraint. 

Claim 3.1.14. AlgoforMerge cuts exactly Wg/p subsets from the clusters Ci ∈ C .Proof. Suppose the algorithm cuts a subset Wi,z from the cluster Ci and merges it to another set of clusters Cm1 , C m2 , . . . , C mt (say). When AlgoforGeneral cuts a partition Wi,z the deficit of Ci reduces by (p − | Wi,z |) that is it gets updated to 

d(Ci) = d(Ci) − (p − | Wi,z |) (3.21) and when it merges this subset to a set of clusters Cm1 , C m2 , . . . , C mt then the total deficit of clusters other than Ci reduces by |Wi,z | that is it gets updated to 

X 

> Cj̸=Ci

d(Cj ) = X 

> Cj̸=Ci

d(Cj ) − | Wi,z | (3.22) Adding Eq. (3.21) and Eq. (3.22), we get that the total deficit decreases exactly by p for cutting one part. 

X

> Ci∈newcut ∪merge ′

d(Ci) = X

> Ci∈newcut ∪merge ′

d(Cj ) − p. (3.23) 59 Hence, to decrease the deficit Wg to zero, our algorithm cuts exactly W/p subsets. 

Claim 3.1.15. T ∗ cuts exactly Wg/p subsets from the clusters Ci ∈ C .Proof. In the clustering, T ∗ for each cluster Ti ∈ T ∗, blue (Ti) is divisible by p but in the clustering 

C (input of AlgoforGeneral ) the total deficit is Wg.If T ∗ cuts a partition Wi,z from Ci then deficit of Ci would reduce by (p − | Wi,z |). That is, it gets updated to 

d(Ci) = d(Ci) − (p − | Wi,z |). (3.24) Now, these |Wi,z | vertices can reduce the total deficit of other clusters by at most |Wi,z |. That is, it gets updated to at most 

X 

> Cj̸=Ci

d(Cj ) ≥ X 

> Cj̸=Ci

d(Cj ) − | Wi,z |. (3.25) Adding Eq. (3.24) and Eq. (3.25), we get that T ∗ can decrease the total deficit at most by p by cutting one part. 

X

> Ci∈newcut ∪merge ′

d(Ci) ≥ X

> Ci∈newcut ∪merge ′

d(Cj ) − p. (3.26) Hence, to decrease the deficit Wg to zero, T ∗ must cut at least W/p subsets. Since, by Claim 3.1.14, we get our algorithm can fulfill the deficit of Wg only by cutting Wg/p 

subsets. Since T ∗ is the optimal clustering, it must cut at most Wg/p subsets. Thus we get T ∗ cuts exactly Wg/p subsets. Now, min X

> Ci∈cut-OPT
> m

X

> z=0

xi,z κz (Ci) + X

> Ci∈merge-OPT

μ(Ci)

⇔ min X

> Ci∈cut-OPT
> m

X

> z=0

xi,z κz (Ci) − X

> Ci∈cut-OPT

μ(Ci) + X

> Ci∈C

μ(Ci)

⇔ min X

> Ci∈cut-OPT
> m

X

> z=1

xi,z κz (Ci) + xi, 0κ0(Ci) − μ(Ci)

!

+ X

> Ci∈C

μ(Ci)

Now, to prove our claim 

X

> Ci∈cut-algo



> n

X

> j=1

yi,z κj (Ci) + yi, 0 κ0(Ci) − μ(Ci)

 + X

> Ci∈C

μ(Ci) ≤ dist( C, T ∗).

We need to prove that xi,z = 1 iff yi,z = 1 .

Claim 3.1.16. xi,z = 1 iff yi,z = 1 .

60 Proof. Let’s look at the objective function of the above ILP. min X

> Ci∈cut-OPT
> m

X

> z=1

xi,z κz (Ci) + xi, 0κ0(Ci) − μ(Ci)

!

+ X

> Ci∈C

μ(Ci)

and the constraint 1 of the ILP 

xi,z ≤ xi,z ′ for z > z ′

The above constraint implies that if T ∗ cuts a cluster Ci, it must cut the 0th subset Wi, 0 of Ci.Now, to minimize the above objective function, we can assume the cost assigned to the 0th subset of Ci is κ(Ci) − μ(Ci), (note κ0(Ci) = κ(Ci)). and the cost assigned to the zth subset of Ci is κz (Ci).More specifically, 

cost (Wi,z ) = κ(Ci) − μ(Ci) for z = 0 

cost (Wi,z ) = κz (Ci) for z ≥ 1 (3.27) Now, minimizing the above objective function is equivalent to minimizing the total cost of subsets that T ∗ cuts. Since, in Claim 3.1.15 we get T ∗ cuts exactly Wg/p subsets so to solve the above ILP exactly our algorithm needs to cut Wg/p subsets that have the minimum cost. Note that for all clusters 

Ci ∈ cut , we have 

cost (Wi, 0) = ( κ(Ci) − μ(Ci)) 

≤ (κ(Cj ) − μ(Cj )) ∀Cj ∈ merge (3.28) This is because 

cost (Wj, 0) − cost (Wi, 0)= sj (|Cj | − sj ) − (p − sj )|Cj | − si(|Ci| − si) + ( p − si)|Ci|

= (2 sj − p)|Cj | − s2 

> j

+ ( p − 2si)|Ci| + s2 

> i

(3.29) 

≥ 0

Since sj = ( blue (Cj ) mod p) ≥ p/ 2 and si = ( blue (Ci) mod p) < p/ 2 we get that all the terms in the Eq. (3.29) are positive except the term −s2 

> j

. Now, |Ci|p > s 2 

> j

because p > s j , and we can assume |Ci| ≥ p because if Ci is less than p then κ(Ci) = 0 and we can ignore those clusters because we cut no vertices from a cluster Ci where |Ci| < p .Hence, T ∗ must cut the subset Wi, 0 from all clusters Ci ∈ cut .Now, in the subroutine AlgoforMerge at each iteration, we select the subsets Wi,z for which 

cost (Wi,z ) is the minimum. From Claim 3.1.14 we get AlgoforGeneral also cuts Wg/p subsets which is same as T ∗.Thus, our algorithm also selects the subsets that have the minimum cost and hence xi,j = 1 iff 

yi,j = 1 .61 Now we prove Claim 3.1.17 where we provide a bound on cost 3(T ) and cost 4(T ) paid by our algorithm AlgoforGeneral . In the proof of Claim 3.1.17, we are going to use the following notations. Suppose a subset Wi,z of Ci gets split into W (1)  

> i,z

, . . . , W (t) 

> i,z

and gets merged into clusters 

Cm1 , . . . , C mt ∈ merge . Let Tj1 , . . . , T jt ∈ T be the clusters formed from Cm1 , . . . , C mt respec-tively by either merging deficit number of blue vertices to these clusters. So, the pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ W (k) 

> i,z

and v ∈ Tjk \ (Cmk ∪ W (k) 

> i,z

) must be counted in dist( C, T ).Let us denote the number of such pairs by cost 3(Wi,z ).Again, the pairs u ∈ W (k1) 

> i,z

and v ∈ W (k2) 

> i,z

must be counted in dist( C, T ). Let us denote the number of such pairs by cost 4(Wi,z ).Now, let us assume 

cost 3(T ) = X

> Ci∈C
> m

X

> z=0

cost 3(Wi,z ).

cost 4(T ) = X

> Ci∈C
> m

X

> z=0

cost 4(Wi,z )

where m = ( |blue (Ci) |− si)/p . Now, we prove the following claim. To prove the following claim, we need to recall the following definitions 

• merge-algo : The set of clusters Cm ∈ C where the algorithm AlgoforGeneral has merged the deficit amount of vertices to it. 

• cut-algo : The set of clusters Ci ∈ C where the algorithm AlgoforGeneral has cut the surplus amount of vertices from it. 

Claim 3.1.17. cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ) ≤ 2 dist( C, T ∗).Proof. Case 1: When |Wi,z | ≤ p/ 2: In this case, we prove that 

cost 3(Wi,z ) + cost 4(Wi,z ) ≤ W (1)  

> i,z

|Cm1 | + μ(Cm2 ) + . . . + μ(Cmt−1 ) + W (t) 

> i,z

|Cmt |

Thus adding over all clusters Ci ∈ C and all subsets Wi,z ∈ Ci we get that 

X

> Ci∈C
> m

X

> z=0

cost 3(Wi,z ) + X

> Ci∈C
> m

X

> z=0

cost 4(Wi,z ) = cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T )

≤ X

> Cm∈merge-algo

μ(Cm)(Reason provided below) )

< 2 X

> Cm∈merge-algo

s(Cm)( |Cm| − s(Cm)) + 12 s(Cm)( p − s(Cm)) 

62 < 2 dist( C, T ∗)(from Lemma 3.1.4) 

Reason: This is because for the clusters Cmk for k ∈ [2 , (t − 1)] the subset W (k) 

> i,z

covers the deficit of the clusters Cmk fully that is Tjk \ (Cmk ∪ W (k) 

> i,z

) = ∅ and for k = 1 and k = t we have charged only the merge cost contributed by the parts W (1)  

> i,z

and W (t) 

> i,z

respectively. Thus, now we prove 

cost 3(Wi,z ) + cost 4(Wi,z ) ≤ W (1)  

> i,z

|Cm1 | + μ(Cm2 ) + . . . + μ(Cmt−1 ) + W (t) 

> i,z

|Cmt |

Recall cost 3(Wi,z ) is the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ W (k) 

> i,z

and v ∈ Tjk \ (Cmk ∪ W (k) 

> i,z

).Thus 

cost 3(Wi,z ) = 

> t

X

> k=1

W (k) 

> i,z

Tjk1 \ (Cmk1 ∪ W (k) 

> i,z

)

<

> t

X

> k=1

12



W (k)

> i,z

p

2

 

as Tjk \ (Cmk ∪ W (k) 

> i,z

) < p/ 2



≤ 12

> t

X

> k=1



W (k) 

> i,z

|Cmk |



(3.30) The 1/2 in the above expression comes from the fact that when we sum over all the clusters 

Ci ∈ C and all subsets Wi,z ∈ Ci we are counting the pairs twice once while considering the subset 

W (k) 

> i,z

and again while considering the subset Tjk \ (Cmk ∪ W (k) 

> i,z

).Recall cost 4(Wi,z ) is the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ W (k1) 

> i,z

and v ∈ W (k2) 

> i,z

. Thus 

cost 4(Wi,z ) = 

> t

X 

> k1,k 2=1
> k1̸=k2

W (k1) 

> i,z

W (k2)

> i,z

<

> t

X

> k=1

12



W (k)

> i,z

p

2

 

as W (k2) 

> i,z

< p/ 2



≤ 12

> t

X

> k=1



W (k) 

> i,z

|Cmk |



(3.31) The 1/2 in the above expression comes from the fact that when we sum over all the clusters 

Ci ∈ C and all subsets Wi,z ∈ Ci we are counting the pairs twice once while considering the subset 

W (k1) 

> i,z

and again while considering the subset W (k2) 

> i,z

.Thus from Eq. (3.30) and Eq. (3.31) we get that, 

cost 3(Wi,z ) + cost 4(Wi,z ) ≤

> t

X

> k=1



W (k) 

> i,z

|Cmk |



63 = W (1)  

> i,z

|Cm1 | + μ(Cm2 ) + . . . + μ(Cmt−1 ) + W (t) 

> i,z

|Cmt |

The reason behind the last expression is as stated before, for the clusters Cmk for k ∈ [2 , (t − 1)] 

the parts W (k) 

> i,z

covers the deficit of the clusters Cmk entirely, that is Tjk \



Cmk ∪ W (k)

> i,z



= ∅.Case 2: When |Wi,z | > p/ 2 : For a cluster Cm ∈ merge-algo the deficit of the cluster Cm,

d(Cm) < p/ 2. This implies the deficit of Cm is either filled by exactly one subset Wi,z or by two subsets Wi,z ∈ Ci and Wj,z ′ ∈ Cj .We divide our proof again into two subcases: Case 2( a): When the deficit of Cm is filled by a subset Wi,z ∈ Ci: Let us assume a cluster 

Tj ∈ T is created from the cluster Ck ∈ C by merging the deficit d(Ck) = dm (say) to it. Let, a part of Wi,z , W (1)  

> i,z

(say) be used to fill dm. Hence, cost 3(W (1)  

> i,z

) = 0 because the deficit is filled up by a subset that belongs to only one cluster Ci ∈ C .Again, cost 4(Wi,z ) = ( |W (1)  

> i,z

| (|Wi,z | − | W (1)  

> i,z

|) ) because when we merge W (1)  

> i,z

part of Wi,z to Ck

and the remaining part (Wi,z − W (1)  

> i,z

) is merged to other clusters in merge-algo . Hence, 

cost 3(W (1)  

> i,z

) + cost 4(Wi,z ) = |W (1)  

> i,z

| (|Wi,z | − | W (1)  

> i,z

|)

≤ (dm · (p − dm)) (∵ |W (1)  

> i,z

| = dm and |Wi,z | ≤ p)

(3.32) From Lemma 3.1.4 we get that for a cluster Cm ∈ merge-algo OPT Cm ≥ s(Cm)( |Cm| − s(Cm)) + 12 s(Cm)( p − s(Cm)) 

> 12 dm (p − dm) (∵ |Ck| > (p − dm)) (3.33) Hence, by Eq. (3.32) and Eq. (3.33) we get, that we can charge the 2 OPT Cm for cost 3(W (1)  

> i,z

) + 

cost 4(Wi,z ).Case 2( b): When deficit of the cluster d(Ck) = dm is filled by the subsets of exactly two clusters 

Wi,z ∈ Ci and Wj,z ∈ Cj : Let us assume a cluster Tj ∈ T is created from the cluster Ck by merging the deficit d(Ck) = dm (say) to it. Let, a part of Wi,z , W (2)  

> i,z

is used to fill the deficit of Ck. Similarly, let part of Wj,z , W (1)  

> j,z

is used to fill the deficit of Ck. Hence, 

cost 3(W (2)  

> i,z

) + cost 3(W (1)  

> j,z

) = |W (2)  

> i,z

| | W (1)  

> j,z

|

and 

cost 4(Wj,z ) = |W (1)  

> j,z

| (|Wj,z | − | W (1)  

> j,z

|)

( note we have already charged the cost cost 4(Wi,z ) in case 1 ). Hence, 

cost 3(W (2)  

> i,z

) + cost 3(W (1)  

> j,z

) + cost 4(Wj,z ) = ( |W (1)  

> i,z

| | W (1)  

> j,z

|) + ( |W (1)  

> j,z

| (|Wj,z | − | W (1)  

> j,z

|)) .

64 Now, WLOG we can assume (|Wj,z | − | W (1)  

> j,z

|) < p/ 2 because otherwise there exists a portion 

W (1 ′) 

> j,z

of (Wj,z \ W (1)  

> j,z

) that is used to fill the deficit of some cluster fully in merge-algo and thus we have charged cost 4(wj,z ) in case (1) .Hence, 

cost 3(W (2)  

> i,z

) + cost 3(W (1)  

> j,z

) + cost 4(Wj,z ) = ( |W (2)  

> i,z

| | W (1)  

> j,z

|) + ( |W (1)  

> j,z

| (|Wj,z | − | W (1)  

> j,z

|)) 

≤ | W (2)  

> i,z

| dm + |W (1)  

> j,z

| p/ 2(as |W (1)  

> j,z

| < d m and (|Wj,z | − | W (1)  

> j,z

|) < p/ 2) 

≤ (|W (2)  

> i,z

| + |W (1)  

> j,z

|) ( p − dm)(as dm and p/ 2 ≤ (p − dm)) = dm (p − dm) (3.34) Hence, by Eq. (3.34), Eq. (3.33) and Lemma 3.1.4 we get, that we can charge the 2 OPT Cm for 

cost 3(W (2)  

> i,z

) + cost 3(W (1)  

> j,z

) + cost 4(Wj,z ).Since, 

dm(p − dm) = ( p − s(Cm)) s(Cm)

< 2 ( s(Cm)( |Cm| − s(Cm)) + 12 s(Cm)( p − s(Cm))) 

< 2OPT Ck

Thus, combining the above two cases, we get, 

X

> Ci∈C
> m

X

> z=0

cost 3(Wi,z ) + X

> Ci∈C
> m

X

> z=0

cost 4(Wi,z ) = cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T )

≤ 2 X

> Cm∈merge-algo

OPT Cm

≤ 2 dist( C, T ∗)(from Lemma 3.1.4) 

Now we are ready to prove Lemma 3.1.2 

Proof of Lemma 3.1.2. Suppose yi,j takes the value 1 if we cut the jth subset of size p from a cluster 

Ci in the subroutine AlgoforMerge otherwise 0. Hence, 

dist( C, T ) = X

> Ci∈cut-algo
> n

X

> j=0

yi,j κi(Cj ) + X 

> Cj∈merge-algo

μ(Cj ) + cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ).

65 = X

> Ci∈cut-algo



> n

X

> j=1

yi,j κj (Ci) + yi, 0 κ0(Ci) − μ(Ci)

 + X

> Ci∈C

μ(Ci) + cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ).

≤ dist( C, T ∗) + 2 dist( C, T ∗).

= 3 dist( C, T ∗).

Approximation guarantee in the cut case 

In this section, we show that, in the cut case, the clustering output by our algorithm AlgoforGeneral 

has a distance of at most 3.5OPT from the input clustering. In particular, we prove the following lemma that we restate below. 

Lemma 3.1.3. If P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) > P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ), the algorithm AlgoforGeneral produces a 

pdc T such that dist( C, T ) ≤ 3.5 dist( C, T ∗).

To prove Lemma 3.1.3, we need to define and recall some definitions. 

cost 1(T ) : X

> Ci∈C

si(|Ci| − si) (3.35) It is the total cost of cutting the surplus blue vertices from a cluster Ci ∈ C .

cost 2(T ) : X 

> Cj∈C

(p − sj )|Cj | (3.36) It is the total cost of merging the d(Cj ) number of blue vertices to a cluster Cj ∈ C .Now, let’s recall the following definitions where for a cluster Tk ∈ T we defined π(Tk) as a parent of Tk iff π(Tk) ∈ C and Tk is formed either by cutting some vertices from π(Tk) or by merging some vertices to π(Tk).Thus, our algorithm pays the above four types of costs. To prove Lemma 3.1.3, first, we need to prove some claims. We first argue (in Claim 3.1.18) that T ∗ must pay P 

> Ci∈C
> si(p−si)2

in the cut case where si = s(Ci).

Claim 3.1.18. 

dist( C, T ∗) ≥ X

> Ci∈C

si(p − si)2

Proof. Suppose there is an input cluster Ck ∈ C that is split into t parts (say) Xk, 1, . . . , X k,t .We can assume that the cluster Ck consists only of blue vertices. If it contains red vertices, the cost paid by T ∗ for splitting Ck into t parts would be more because the red vertices would increase the size of the cluster Ck. Let us assume that the surplus of Xk,i be sk,j and to make the number of blue vertices in each cluster a multiple of p T ∗ must merge at least (p − sk,j ) blue vertices to Xk,j .Hence, 66 OPT Ck ≥ 12



> t

X

> j=1

sk,j (p − sk,j )

 (3.37) Now, since Ptj=1 sk,j mod p = sk thus from Proposition 3.1.5 we get, 

12



> t

X

> j=1

sk,j (p − sk,j )

 ≥ sk(p − sk)2 (3.38) Now, 

dist( C, T ∗) = X

> Ci∈C

OPT Ci

≥ X

> Ci∈C

si(p − si)2 (from Eq. (3.37) and Eq. (3.38) )

This completes the proof. The following lemma is a consequence of Claim 3.1.18 

Claim 3.1.19. 

OPT ≥ X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

12 s2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈merge

12 d2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈cut ′

si(p − si)2

Here, si = s(Ci) and Ci = d(Ci).Proof. We have 

X

> Ci∈C

si(p − si)2 = X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

si(p − si)2 + X

> Ci∈merge

si(p − si)2 + X

> Ci∈cut ′

si(p − si)2 .

For each Ci ∈ cut , si ≤ p 

> 2

. Hence si(p − si) ≥ si p 

> 2

≥ s2 

> i

.For each Ci ∈ merge , si ≥ p 

> 2

. Hence si(p − si) ≥ p 

> 2

(p − si) ≥ d2 

> i

(where Ci = ( p − si)). These observations imply that 

X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

12 s2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈merge

12 d2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈cut ′

si(p − si)2 ≤ X

> Ci∈C

si(p − si)2 ≤ OPT ,

where the last inequality is from Claim 3.1.18. This completes the proof. 

Claim 3.1.20. If P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) > P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ) then cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) ≤ 2 OPT .

67 Proof. By the definition of cost 1(T ), we have cost 1(T ) = P 

> Ci∈cut-algo

κ(Ci). Now, if P 

> Ci∈cut

s(Ci) > P  

> Cj∈merge

d(Cj ) that is in the cut case we have cut-algo = cut . Recall that cut-algo is the set of clusters Ci ∈ C from which we cut some vertices at any vertex during the execution of our algorithm AlgoforGeneral . Since in the cut case, we only cut from the clusters 

Ci ∈ cut that is the clusters Ci for which s(Ci) ≤ p/ 2 we have cut-algo = cut . Hence, in the cut case, we have, 

cost 1(T ) = X

> Ci∈cut-algo

κ(Ci) = X

> Ci∈cut

κ(Ci). (3.39) Similarly, in the cut case, we also have merge-algo = merge thus we have 

cost 2(T ) = X

> Ci∈merge-algo

μ(Ci) = X

> Ci∈merge

μ(Ci). (3.40) Hence, from Eq. (3.39) and Eq. (3.40) we have 

cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) = X

> Ci∈cut

κ(Ci) + X

> Ci∈merge

μ(Ci). (3.41) Now, from Lemma 3.1.4 we get for all clusters Ci ∈ cut we have 

OPT Ci ≥ s(Ci)( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 12 s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) 

> κ (Ci)

and for all clusters Ci ∈ merge we have 

OPT Ci ≥ (p − s(Ci))( |Ci| − s(Ci)) + 12 s(Ci)( p − s(Ci)) 

≥ 2 μ(Ci)

Thus we have 

dist( C, T ∗) = X

> Ci∈cut

OPT Ci + X

> Ci∈merge

OPT Ci

≥ X

> Ci∈cut

κ(Ci) + 2 X

> Ci∈merge

μ(Ci). (3.42) Now, from Eq. (3.42) and Eq. (3.41) we get 

cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) ≤ 2 dist( C, T ∗)

≤ 2 OPT .

68 Claim 3.1.21. cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ) ≤ 1.5 OPT .Proof. We introduce some notations. For each cluster Ci ∈ cut , denote by Xi, 1, X i, 2, . . . , X i,ℓ i the partition of si blue vertices that are split from Ci, and each of these parts are merged to different clusters Cj ’s in merge , for 

k = 1 , 2, . . . , ℓ j .Let E be the set of clusters of size p formed by AlgoforCut . Let Ej be its jth cluster. Represents 

Ej = Yj, 1 ∪ Yj, 2 ∪ · · · ∪ Yj,y j where each Yj,k is a set of blue vertices coming from a cluster Cjk ∈ cut .We prove this claim by showing the correctness of the following claims. 

Claim 3.1.22. cost 4(T ) ≤ P

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

12 s2 

> i

+ P

> Ci∈cut ′

P 

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k |



.

Claim 3.1.23. cost 3(T ) ≤ P

> Ci∈merge

12 d2 

> i

+ 12

P 

> Ej∈E

 P yj 

> k=1

|Yj,k |(p − | Yj,k |) .

Claim 3.1.24. 

X

> Ci∈cut ′

 X

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k |

 + 12

X 

> Ej∈E
> yj

X

> k=1

|Yj,k |(p − | Yj,k |)

!

≤ 32

X

> Ci∈cut ′

si(p − si)2 .

Given the correctness of the claims above, the lemma can be proved as follows. 

cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T )

≤ X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

12 s2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈merge

12 d2

> i

+ X

> Ci∈cut ′

 X

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k |

 + 12

X 

> Ej∈E
> yj

X

> k=1

|Yj,k |(p − | Yj,k |)

!

(by Claim 3.1.22 and Claim 3.1.23 )

≤ X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

12 s2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈merge

12 d2 

> i

+ 32

X

> Ci∈cut ′

si(p − si)2 (by Claim 3.1.24 )

≤ 32

 X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

12 s2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈merge

12 d2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈cut ′

si(p − si)2



≤ 32 OPT . (by Claim 3.1.19 )

We now proceed to the proof of each of the above claims to finish the proof: 

Proof for Claim 3.1.22. By definition, 

cost 4(T ) = X

> Ci∈cut

 X

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j, || Xi,k |



= X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

 X

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k |

 + X

> Ci∈cut ′

 X

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k |



69 Note that P 

> 1≤j≤ℓi

|Xi,j | = si, therefore P 

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k | ≤ 12

P 

> 1≤j≤ℓi

|Xi,j |

2

= 12 s2 

> i

, it follows that 

cost 4(T ) ≤ X

> Ci∈cut \cut ′

12 s2 

> i

+ X

> Ci∈cut ′

 X

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k |

.

Proof for Claim 3.1.23. For each cluster Ci ∈ merge , AlgoforGeneral brings di blue vertices from some other clusters Ci′ ∈ cut into Ci. Denote by Yi, 1, Y i, 2, . . . , Y i,y i the partition of these di blue vertices such that in the following order, AlgoforGeneral merges into Ci: Yi, 1 from Ci1 , Yi, 2 from 

Ci2 , and so on, Yi,y i from Ciyi . This implies 

di = |Yi, 1| + |Yi, 2| + · · · + |Yi,y i |, (3.43) and the cost contributed to cost 3(T ) by this cluster Ci is 

12



> yi

X

> j=1

|Yi,j |(di − | Yi,j |)

 ≤ 12yi

di(yi − 1) di (3.44) 

≤ 12 d2 

> i

. (3.45) To obtain (3.44), we use Chebyshev inequality ( a1b1+a2b2+...a nbn 

> n

≤ a1+a2+...a n 

> nb1+b2+...b n
> n

, for 

a1 ≤ a2 ≤ · · · ≤ an, b 1 ≥ b2 ≥ · · · ≥ bn), combining with (3.43). Similarly, for each cluster of size p, Ej ∈ E , we can assume Ej is formed by Yj, 1 from Cj1 , Yj, 2

from Cj2 , and so on, Yj,y j from Cjyj . Therefore, the cost contributed to cost 3(T ) by Pj is 

12

> yj

X

> k=1

|Yj,k |(p − | Yj,k |) (3.46) From (3.45) and (3.46), we have cost 3(T ) ≤ P

> Ci∈merge

12 d2 

> i

+ 12

P 

> Ej∈E

 P yj 

> k=1

|Yj,k |(p − | Yj,k |) .

Proof for Claim 3.1.24. Let 

A = X

> Ci∈cut ′

 X

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k |

 + 12

X 

> Ej∈E
> yj

X

> k=1

|Yj,k |(p − | Yj,k |)

!

,

and A′ = P

> Ci∈cut ′

si(p − si)2 . We need to show that A ≤ 32 A′.In each cluster Ci ∈ cut ′, AlgoforCut splits si blue vertices from it, and these si blue vertices are split again into at most two parts. Therefore, we can write P 

> 1≤j<k ≤ℓi

|Xi,j || Xi,k | = |Xi, 1|(si −|Xi, 1|) = αi, 1(si − αi, 1), where 0 < α i, 1 = |Xi, 1| ≤ si.Each cluster Ej ∈ E is formed by merging Yj, 1 from Cj1 ∈ cut ′, Yj, 2 from Cj2 ∈ cut ′, and so on, 

Yj,y j from Cjyj ∈ cut ′, in that order. Therefore, |Yj,k | = sjk for 2 ≤ k < y j , and |Yj, 1| = αj1 ≤ sj1 ,

|Yj,y j | = βjyj ≤ sjyj .70 A can be rewritten as 

A = X

> Ci∈cut ′

αi, 1(si − αi, 1)+ 12

X 

> Ej∈E

αj1 (p − αj1 ) +  

> yj−1

X

> t=2

sj′ 

> t

(p − sj′ 

> t

) + βjyj (p − βjyj )



= X 

> Pj∈E

 12

αj1 (p − αj1 ) +  

> yj−1

X

> t=2

sj′ 

> t

(p − sj′ 

> t

) + βjyj (p − βjyj )

 + αj1 (sj1 − αj1 )



= X 

> Pj∈E

 12

αj1 (p − sj1 ) +  

> yj−1

X

> t=2

sj′ 

> t

(p − sj′ 

> t

) + βjyj (p − sjyj )



+ 3 αj1 (sj1 − αj1 ) + βjyj (sjyj − βjyj )



= X 

> Cj∈cut ′

sj (p − sj )2 + X 

> Ej∈E



3αj1 (sj1 − αj1 ) + βjyj (sjyj − βjyj )



= A′ + X 

> Ej∈E

12 (3 αj1 (sj1 − αj1 ) + βjyj (sjyj − βjyj )) .

Since sj ≤ p 

> 2

for all Cj ∈ cut , and p = αj1 + sj2 + · · · + sjyj + βjyj , it follows that 

A′ ≥ X 

> Ej∈E

12 (αj1 + sj2 + · · · + sjyj + βjyj ) p

2= |E| p2

4 .

Moreover, αj1 (sj1 − αj1 ) ≤ s2

> j1

4 ≤ p2

16 , and βjyj (sjyj − βjyj )) ≤

s2

> jyj

4 ≤ p2

16 . Combining these facts, we get 

A ≤ A′ + |E| 12



3 p2

16 + p2

16 



= A′ + |E| p2

8 ≤ 32 A′,

which is desired. Now we are ready to prove Lemma 3.1.3. 

Proof of Lemma 3.1.3. Let T be the output of AlgoforGeneral in the cut case. Let 

cost 1(T ), cost 2(T ), cost 3(T ), cost 4(T ) be the four costs that are paid by our algorithm when in 71 AlgoforGeneral , we are left with the clusters present only in cut . Lemma 3.1.3 is essentially showing that 

cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) + cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ) ≤ 2 OPT + 1 .5OPT .

We complete the proof by applying Claim 3.1.20, which gives 

cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) ≤ 2 OPT ,

and applying Claim 3.1.21, which gives 

cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ) ≤ 1.5OPT .

Hence, from Claim 3.1.20 and Claim 3.1.21 we get that T ∗ pays at most 3.5 OPT in the cut case. 

# 3.2 Making a p-divisible clustering fair. 

Given a p-divisible clustering T = {T1, T 2, . . . , T ζ }, where the vertex set V is partitioned into two color groups, blue and red, with the ratio of blue to red vertices being p : 1 , our goal is to compute a closest fair clustering F∗ to T . Recall that a clustering is said to be fair if, in every cluster, the number of blue vertices is exactly p times the number of red vertices. Our main result in this section is stated below. 

Lemma 3.2.1. Let p > 1 be an integer, and let the vertex set V be partitioned into two color groups, blue and red, such that the ratio of blue to red vertices is p : 1 . Then, there exists a linear-time algorithm that, given any p-divisible clustering T , computes a 3-close fair clustering F to C.More specifically, 

dist( T , F) ≤ 3 · dist( T , F∗),

where F∗ denotes a closest fair clustering to T .

In Section 3.2.1, we introduce the algorithm MakeClustersFair (Algorithm 7), which takes T as its input, and outputs a fair cluster F. We analyze in Section 3.2.2 that dist( T , F) ≤ 3dist( T , F∗).

3.2.1 Details of the Algorithm 

The high-level idea of MakeClustersFair (Algorithm 7) is the following. The pdc T is parti-tioned into two sets. Each cluster Ti is chosen to be in one of the two sets based on whether 

|blue (Ti) | < p |red (Ti) | or |blue (Ti) | > p |red (Ti) |. If it is the former case, Ti is placed into the first set RedHeavy , while if it is the latter case, Ti is placed into the second set BlueHeavy . After that, a set of |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti) |

p red vertices are cut from each cluster Ti ∈ RedHeavy . These vertices are merged to clusters in the set BlueHeavy . Each cluster Tj ∈ BlueHeavy are merged with exactly |blue (Tj |)

p − | red (Tj ) | red vertices. 72 Runtime Analysis of MakeClustersFair . First note, each vertex is used at most twice during the execution of the algorithm MakeClustersFair – once when we cut the red vertex v ∈ V from the cluster in the set RedHeavy and again when we merge that red vertex v ∈ V to cluster that belongs to the set BlueHeavy . Hence, the total runtime of the algorithm MakeClustersFair would be O(|V |).

3.2.2 Approximation Guarantee of MakeClustersFair 

In this section, we aim to prove Lemma 3.2.1. Consider a cluster Ti ∈ T . Suppose that in F∗, Ti is spread through clusters Xi, 1 ∪ Bi, 1 ∪

Ri, 1, X i, 2 ∪ Bi, 2 ∪ Ri, 2, . . . , X i,t ∪ Bi,t ∪ Ri,t , such that Ti = ∪tj=1 Xi,j , and Bi,j , R i,j are the set of blue vertices and red vertices from some clusters Tk (k̸ = i), respectively. Then the distance between the two clusterings F∗ and T is 

dist( T , F∗) = X

> Ti∈T

X

> j<k

|Xi,j || Xi,k | +

> t

X

> j=1

|Xi,j |(|Bi,j | + |Ri,j |)2



= X

> Ti∈T

OPT Ti ,

where OPT Ti = P 

> j<k

|Xi,j || Xi,k | + Ptj=1 

|Xi,j |(|Bi,j | + |Ri,j |)2 .Prior to proving the correctness of Lemma 3.2.1, we demonstrate some useful lower bounds for 

OPT Ti . In particular, let d = |blue (Ti)| 

> p

− | red (Ti) |, s = |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti)| 

> p

, then 

• If Ti ∈ BlueHeavy , then OPT Ti ≥ 12 d|Ti|;

• If Ti ∈ RedHeavy , then OPT Ti ≥ 12 s(|Ti| − s);

• If Ti ∈ RedHeavy , then OPT Ti ≥ s2

> i

2 .To show this, we leverage the following lemma. 

Lemma 3.2.2. Given positive numbers x1, x 2, . . . , x t and a positive integer S such that S ≤ Pti=1 xi.Then for any a1, a 2, . . . , a n such that ai ≥ 0, there exists non-negative integers y1, y 2, . . . , y t satisfy-ing: 

• 0 ≤ yi ≤ ⌈ xi⌉, for i = 1 , 2, . . . , t .

• Pti=1 yi = S.

• Pti=1 aiyi ≤ Pti=1 aixi.Proof. Without loss of generality, assume that a1 ≤ a2 ≤ · · · ≤ an.We will show that the output of the following algorithm is the desired yi’s. Let yi’s be the output of Algorithm 1. 

• 0 ≤ yi ≤ ⌈ xi⌉, for i = 1 , 2, . . . , t .73 Algorithm 1: Choose (y1, y 2, . . . , y t). 

> 1

yj ← ⌊ xj ⌋, ∀j 

> 2

while Pti=1 yi > S do  

> 3

for i = 1 → t do  

> 4

if Pti=1 yi > S and yi > 0 then  

> 5

yi ← yi − 1 

> 6

while Pti=1 yi < S do  

> 7

for i = 1 → t do  

> 8

if Pti=1 yi < S and yi < ⌈xi⌉ then  

> 9

yi ← yi + 1  

> 10

return (y1, y 2, . . . , y t)

Observe that yi is decreased by 1 (Algorithm 1) only if yi > 0, and is increased by 1 (Algorithm 1) only if yi < ⌈xi⌉. Hence, each yi output by this algorithm satisfies 0 ≤ yi ≤ ⌈ xi⌉.

• Pti=1 yi = S.To see this, we consider (y1, y 2, . . . , y t) after the execution of each while loop. Initially, yi is set to ⌊xi⌋. If Pti=1 yi > S , the first while loop gradually decreases Pti=1 yi by 1 by decreasing a nonzero yi by 1, until Pti=1 yi = y. Since min Pti=1 yi = 0 and S ≥ 0, there must be an iteration where Pti=1 yi = S. After this iteration, the first while loop is done. The second while loop will not be executed, and the algorithm will return (y1, y 2, . . . , y t) satisfying Pti=1 yi = S.On the other hand, if Pti=1 ⌊xi⌋ < y , the first while loop is not executed. The second while loop gradually increases Pti=1 yi by 1 by increasing a yi < ⌈xi⌉ by 1, until Pti=1 yi. Since S ≤ Pti=1 xi ≤Pti=1 ⌈xi⌉, there always exists some yi(≤ ⌈ xi⌉) that can be increased whenever Pti=1 yt < S . Hence, there must be an iteration where Pti=1 yi = S. After this iteration, the second while loop is done, and the algorithm outputs (y1, y 2, . . . , y t) such that Pti=1 yi = S.

• Pti=1 aiyi ≤ Pti=1 aixi.We first claim that there exists m ≤ t such that for all i < m , we have yi ≥ xi, and for all i ≥ m,we have yi ≤ xi.If yi ≤ xi for all j, then m = 1 satisfies the claim. If there exists yi > x i, since Pti=1 yi < Pti=1 xi,there also exists yi < x i. Let m be the minimum index such that ym < x m, then yi ≥ xi for all 

j < m . Now we show that yi ≤ xi for all j ≥ m.To see this, note that in Algorithm 1, if the second while loop is not executed, then the algorithm only decreases yi. Thus yi ≤ ⌊ xi⌋ ≤ xi for all j. The second while loop is executed only if the first while loop is not. In that case, the second while loop starts with yi = ⌊xi⌋. If yi is increased (Algorithm 1), then yi = ⌈xi⌉ > x i. Assume to the contrary that there exists j > m such that 

yj > x j . This implies that before yj is increased, Pti=1 yi < S . This means that in the iteration of the for loop where i = m, we have Pti=1 yi < S and by definition of m, ym < x m. It follows that ym

is increased and becomes greater than xm, which is a contradiction since in the output, ym < x m.This concludes that yi ≤ xi, for all i ≥ m.Finally, we show that Pti=1 aiyi ≤ Pti=1 aixi. We have 

> t

X

> i=1

xi ≥

> t

X

> i=1

yi

74 ⇔

> t

X

> i=m

(xi − yi) ≥

> m−1

X

> i=1

(yi − xi) ≥ 0.

Moreover, note that a1 ≤ a2 ≤ · · · ≤ at, therefore 

> t

X

> i=m

(xi − yj )ai ≥

> t

X

> i=m

(xi − yi)am

≥

> m−1

X

> i=1

(yi − xi)am

=

> m−1

X

> i=1

(yi − xi)ai,

which is equivalent to 

> t

X

> i=1

aiyi ≤

> t

X

> i=1

aixi.

The proof is complete. 

Lemma 3.2.3. For each Ti ∈ BlueHeavy , let d = |blue (Ti) |

p − | red (Ti) |. Then OPT Ti ≥ 12 d|Ti|.Proof. By definition, OPT Ti = P 

> 1≤j<k ≤t

|Xi,j || Xi,k | + Ptj=1 

|Xi,j |(|Bi,j | + |Ri,j |)2 .

Denote by blue (Xi,j ) and red (Xi,j ) the set of blue vertices and the set of red vertices in Xi,j ,respectively. Then Xi,j = blue (Xi,j ) ∪ red (Xi,j ), and |blue (Ti) | = Ptj=1 |blue (Xi,j ) |, |red (Ti) | =

Ptj=1 |red (Xi,j ) |, and |blue (Xi,j ) |, |red (Xi,j ) | ≥ 0.Let S = {j : |blue (Xi,j ) | > p |red (Xi,j ) |} . Then S is a nonempty set because otherwise 

|blue (Ti) | = Ptj=1 |blue (Xi,j ) | ≤ p(Ptj=1 |red (Xi,j ) |) = p|red (Ti) |, which contradicts to the as-sumption that Ti ∈ BlueHeavy .For each j ∈ S, consider arbitrary dj blue vertices from blue (Xi,j ) (dj ≤ | blue (Xi,j ) |). Denote 

d′ = P 

> j∈L

d′ 

> j

. Then 

X

> 1≤j<k ≤t

|Xi,j || Xi,k | ≥ X

> j∈S

(d′

> j

X

> k / ∈S

|Xi,k |) + 12

X

> j∈S

(d′

> j

X

> k∈S\{ j}

|Xi,k |)

≥ 12

X

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

|Ti| − 12

X

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

|Xi,j |

= 12 (X

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

)|Ti| − 12

X

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

|Xi,j |. (3.47) Let Bj = |Bi,j |, R j = |Ri,j |. Let dj = |blue (Xi,j ) |

p − | red (Xi,j ) |.75 Since Xi,j ∪ Bi,j ∪ Ri,j is a cluster in the fair clustering F∗, it means that p(|red (Xi,j ) | + Rj ) = 

q(|blue (Xi,j ) | + Bj ). Therefore, if j ∈ S, then Bj + Rj ≥ |blue (Xi,j ) |

p − | red (Xi,j ) | = d′ 

> j

> 0. Thus 

X

> j∈S

|Xi,j |(Bj + Rj )2 ≥ X

> j∈S

|Xi,j |d′

> j

2 . (3.48) From (3.47) and (3.48), it follows that 

OPT Ti ≥ 12 (X

> j∈S

dj )|Ti| − 12

X

> j∈S

dj |Xi,j | + 12

X

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

|Xi,j |. (3.49) If we can choose dj (≤ | blue (Xij ) |) such that P 

> j∈S

dj = d, and P 

> j∈S

dj |Xi,j | ≤ P 

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

|Xi,j |, then from (3.49), it implies that OPT Ti ≥ 12 d|Ti|, which concludes the proof. To this end, note that dj > 0 for all j ∈ S, and dj ≤ 0 if j / ∈ S. As a result, d = Ptj=1 dj ≤P 

> j∈S

dj . Finally, applying Lemma 3.2.2 (by setting dj = xj , |Xi,j | = aj ), there exists integers d′

> j

satisfying: 

• 0 ≤ d′ 

> j

≤ ⌈ dj ⌉, which implies d′ 

> j

≤ | blue (Xi,j ) | as dj ≤ |blue (Xi,j |)

p and p > 1.

• P 

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

= d.

• P 

> j∈S

d′ 

> j

|Xi,j | ≤ P 

> j∈S

dj |Xi,j |.

Lemma 3.2.4. For each Ti ∈ RedHeavy , let s = |red (Ti) |− |blue (Ti) |

p . Then OPT Ti ≥ 12 s(|Ti|− 

s).Proof. By definition, OPT Ti = P 

> 1≤j<k ≤t

|Xi,j || Xi,k | + Ptj=1 

|Xi,j |(|Bi,j | + |Ri,j |)2 .

Denote by blue (Xi,j ) and red (Xi,j ) the set of blue vertices and the set of red vertices in Xi,j ,respectively. Then Xi,j = blue (Xi,j ) ∪ red (Xi,j ), and |blue (Ti) | = Ptj=1 |blue (Xi,j ) |, |red (Ti) | =

Ptj=1 |red (Xi,j ) |, and |blue (Xi,j ) |, |red (Xi,j ) | ≥ 0.Let L = {j : |blue (Xi,j ) | < p |red (Xi,j ) |} . Then L is a nonempty set because otherwise 

|blue (Ti) | = Ptj=1 |blue (Xi,j ) | ≥ p(Ptj=1 |red (Xi,j ) |) = p|red (Ti) |, which contradicts to the as-sumption that Ti ∈ RedHeavy .For each j ∈ L, consider arbitrary s′ 

> j

red vertices from red (Xi,j ). Denote s′ = P 

> j∈L

s′ 

> j

. Then 

X

> 1≤j<k ≤t

|Xi,j || Xi,k | ≥ X

> j∈L

s′

> j

X

> k / ∈L

|Xi,k |

!

+ X

> j∈L

s′

> j

X

> k∈L\{ j}

(|Xi,k | − s′

> k

)



= X

> j∈L

s′

> j

 |Ti| − s′

> j

 − X

> j∈L

s′

> j

 |Xi,j − s′ 

> j

|

= s′  |Ti| − s′ − X

> j∈L

s′

> j

 |Xi,j | − s′

> j

 . (3.50) 76 For each j, let Bj = |Bi,j |, R j = |Ri,j |. Let sj = |red (Xi,j ) | − |blue (Xi,j ) |

p .Since Xi,j ∪ Bi,j ∪ Ri,j is a cluster in the fair clustering F∗, it means that p(|red (Xi,j ) | + Rj ) = 

q(|blue (Xi,j ) | + Bj ). Therefore, if j ∈ L, then Bj + Rj ≥ p|red (Xi,j ) | − | blue (Xi,j ) | = ps j > 0.Thus 

X

> j∈L

|Xi,j |(Bj + Rj )2 ≥ p

2

X

> j∈L

|Xi,j |sj ≥ 12

X

> j∈L

|Xi,j |sj . (3.51) From (3.50) and (3.51), it follows that 

OPT Ti ≥ s′  |Ti| − s′ − X

> j∈L

sj (|Xi,j | − sj ) + 12

X

> j∈L

s′ 

> j

|Xi,j |≥ 12

s′  |Ti| − s′ − X

> j∈L

sj (|Xi,j | − sj ) + X

> j∈L

s′ 

> j

|Xi,j |

 . (3.52) If we can choose sj (≤ | red (Xi,j ) |) such that P 

> j∈L

sj = s and P 

> j∈L

sj |Xi,j | ≤ P 

> j∈L

s′ 

> j

|Xi,j |,then from (3.52), it implies that OPT Ti ≥ 12 s(|Ti| − s), which completes the proof. To this end, note that sj > 0 for all j ∈ L, and sj ≤ 0 for all j /∈ L. Consequently, s =Ptj=1 sj ≤ P 

> j∈L

sj . Finally, applying Lemma 3.2.2 (by setting sj = xj , |Xi,j | = aj ), there exists integers s′ 

> j

satisfying 

• 0 ≤ s′ 

> j

≤ ⌈ sj ⌉ < |red (Xi,j ) |.

• P 

> j∈S

s′ 

> j

= s.

• P 

> j∈L

sj |Xi,j | ≤ P 

> j∈L

s′ 

> j

|Xi,j |.

Lemma 3.2.5. For each cluster Ti ∈ RedHeavy , let si = |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti|)

p . Then 

OPT Ti ≥ s2

> i

2 .

Proof. By definition, 

OPT Ti = X

> 1≤j<k ≤t

|Xi,j || Xi,k | +

> t

X

> j=1

|Xi,j |(|Bi,j | + |Ri,j |)2 .

Denote by rj , b j the number of red vertices and blue vertices in Xi,j respectively. Then |Xi,j | =

rj + bj . Let Rj = |Ri,j |, and Bj = |Bi,j |.Let L = {j : pr j > b j }. Then L̸ = ∅.For each j ∈ L, let Ej = rj − bj

p > 0. Since Xi,j ∪ Bi,j ∪ Ri,j is a cluster in the fair clustering 

F∗, it means that p(rj + Rj ) = q(bj + Bj ). Therefore, if j ∈ L, then Bj ≥ pr j − bj > 0. We have 

OPT Ti ≥ X

> j∈L

|Xi,j || Bi,j |

2 + X 

> j<k ;j,k ∈L

|Xi,j || Xi,k |

77 ≥ X

> j∈L

rj (pr j − bj )2 + X 

> j<k ;j,k ∈L

rj rk (since |Bi,j | ≥ pr j − bj , |Xi,j | ≥ rj )

≥ 12

X

> j∈L

rj (rj − bj

p ) + 2 X 

> j<k ;j,k ∈L

rj rk

 (since p > 1) 

≥ 12

X

> j∈L

E2 

> j

+ 2 X

> j<k ;j,k ∈L

Ej Ek

 (since rj ≥ rj − bj

p )= (P 

> j∈L

Ej )2

2 .

Note that, if j / ∈ L, rj − bj

p ≤ 0. Therefore, si = |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti) |

p = Ptj=1 rj −

Ptj=1 bj

p ≤

P

> j∈L

(rj − bj

p ) = P 

> j∈L

Ej . It follows that OPT Ti ≥ (P 

> j∈L

Ej )2

2 ≥ s2 

> i

/2.This concludes the proof. Recall that for each cluster Ti ∈ RedHeavy , Algorithm 7 cuts |red (Ti) |− |blue (Ti) |

p red vertices from it. Each cluster in Ti ∈ BlueHeavy will be merged with |blue (Ti) |

p − | red (Ti) | red vertices, which are previously split from clusters in RedHeavy . Note that, during this process, vertices in 

|red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti) |

p red vertices from the same cluster Ti ∈ RedHeavy may be separated from each other to be merged with different clusters in BlueHeavy . Also, |blue (Ti) |

p − | red (Ti) | vertices that are merged to a cluster Ti ∈ BlueHeavy may come from different clusters in RedHeavy .After this process, every cluster Ti has become fair. Therefore, every red vertex that is cut from 

RedHeavy would have been merged to some cluster in BlueHeavy .The distance dist( T , F) is the number of pairs of vertices that are clustered together in one clustering (either T or F) and are separated by the other (either F or T ). We decompose the number of such pairs into four types of costs. In particular, dist( T , F) = cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) + 

cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ), where each cost is defined as follows. 

• cost 1(T ): the number of pairs (u, v ) in which in T , u, v ∈ Ti and Ti ∈ RedHeavy , while in 

F, u is kept in Ti and v is cut from Ti. Since for each Ti ∈ RedHeavy , Algorithm 7 splits 

si = |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti) |

p from it, it follows that 

cost 1(T ) = X

> Ti∈RedHeavy

si(|Ti| − si). (3.53) 

• cost 2(T ): the number of pairs (u, v ) in which in T , u ∈ Ti ∈ BlueHeavy and v ∈ Tj ∈

RedHeavy , while in F, v is split from Tj and is merged to Ti, so that u and v are in the same cluster. Since for each Ti ∈ BlueHeavy , Algorithm 7 merges di = |blue (Ti) |

p − | red (Ti) | red 78 vertices to it, it follows that 

cost 2(T ) = X

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

di|Ti|. (3.54) 

• cost 3(T ): the number of pairs (u, v ) in which in T , u ∈ Tj , and v ∈ Tk where Tj and Tk are distinct clusters in RedHeavy , while in F, u is split from Tj , v is split from Tk and they are both merged to a cluster Ti ∈ BlueHeavy . For each cluster Ti ∈ BlueHeavy , Algorithm 7 merges exactly di = |blue (Ti) |

p − | red (Ti) | red vertices to it. Suppose that among these vertices, αi1 vertices are brought from a cluster Ti1 ∈ RedHeavy , αi2 vertices are brought from a cluster Ti2 ∈ RedHeavy , and so on, αit vertices are brought from a cluster Tit ∈

RedHeavy , such that Ptj=1 αij = di, and Ti1 , T i2 , . . . , T it are distinct clusters. It follows that 

cost 3(T ) = X

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

( X

> 1≤j<k ≤it

αij αik )

≤ X

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

(Ptj=1 αij )2

2 = X

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

d2

> i

2 . (3.55) 

• cost 4(T ): the number of pairs (u, v ) in which u, v are among si = |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti) |

p red vertices split from a cluster Ti ∈ RedHeavy , but u and v are then separated from each other because u and v are merged to different clusters Tj and Tk in BlueHeavy . Suppose that among these vertices, αi1 vertices are merged to a cluster Ti1 ∈ BlueHeavy , αi2 vertices are merged to a cluster Ti2 ∈ BlueHeavy , and so on, αit vertices are merged to a cluster 

Tit ∈ BlueHeavy , such that Ptj=1 αij = si, and Ti1 , T i2 , . . . , T it are distinct clusters. It follows that 

cost 4(T ) = X

> Ti∈RedHeavy

( X

> 1≤j<k ≤it

αij αik )

≤ X

> Ti∈RedHeavy

(Ptj=1 αij )2

2 = X

> Ti∈RedHeavy

s2

> i

2 . (3.56) We are ready to prove Lemma 3.2.1 

Proof of Lemma 3.2.1. Recall that dist( T , F) = cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) + cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ).We show that cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) ≤ 12 dist( T , F∗), and cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ) ≤ dist( T , F∗).Applying Lemma 3.2.4 for each Ti ∈ RedHeavy , we have OPT Ti ≥ 12 si(|Ti| − si). Apply-ing Lemma 3.2.3 for each Ti ∈ BlueHeavy , we have OPT Ti ≥ 12 di|Ti|. Consequently, it follows that 

cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) = X

> Ti∈RedHeavy

si(|Ti| − si) + X

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

di|Ti| (by (3.53) and (3.54) )

79 ≤ 2 X

> Ti∈RedHeavy

OPT Ti + 2 X

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

OPT Ti

≤ 2dist( T , F∗).

In each Ti ∈ BlueHeavy , |Ti| ≥ | blue (Ti) | > pd i. Therefore, applying Lemma 3.2.3, it follows that OPT Ti ≥ di|Ti| ≥ pd 2 

> i

. Using (3.55), we have cost 3(T ) ≤ P

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

d2

> i

2 ≤

P

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

OPT Ti

2p .For each Ti ∈ RedHeavy , applying Lemma 3.2.5, we have OPT Ti ≥ s2

> i

2 . Using (3.56) implies that cost 4(T ) ≤ P

> Ti∈RedHeavy

s2

> i

2 ≤ P 

> Ti∈RedHeavy

OPT Ti . Then cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T ) is upper bounded by 

X

> Ti∈BlueHeavy

OPT Ti

2p + X

> Ti∈RedHeavy

OPT Ti ≤ X

> Ti∈T

OPT Ti = dist( T , F∗).

To summarize, we have 

dist( T , F) = cost 1(T ) + cost 2(T ) + cost 3(T ) + cost 4(T )

≤ 2dist( T , F∗) + dist( T , F∗)= 3dist( T , F∗).

This completes the proof. 

# 3.3 Concluding the Approximation Guarantee 

In this section, we prove Theorem 4 by combining the results of Lemma 3.2.1 and Lemma 3.1.1 to establish the overall approximation guarantee. Specifically, we show that the clustering F ob-tained by first applying AlgoforGeneral to the input clustering C to obtain T , and then applying 

MakeClustersFair to T , yields a 17 -close fair clustering with respect to C. Instead of directly proving Theorem 4, we first prove the following lemma, which immediately implies Theorem 4 by setting the parameters δ = 3 .5 and α = 3 .

Lemma 3.3.1. Consider any δ, α ≥ 1. Suppose there is a t1(n)-time algorithm Algorithm-A() that, given any clustering on n points, produces an δ-close pdc , and a t2(n)-time algorithm Algorithm-B() that, given any pdc on n points, produces a α-close fair clustering. Then there is an O(t1(n) + 

t2(n) + n)-time algorithm that, given any clustering on n points, produces an (δ + α + δα )-close fair clustering. Proof. Consider the following simple algorithm: Given a clustering C as input, first run Algorithm-A() to generate a pdc T , and then run Algorithm-B() with T as input to generate a fair clustering 

F. Finally, output F.It is straightforward to see that the running time of the above algorithm is O(t1(n) + t2(n) + n).We now claim that F is an (δ + α + δα )-close fair clustering of the input clustering C.80 Let F∗ be an (arbitrary) closest fair clustering of the input C, and T ∗ be an (arbitrary) closest 

pdc of the input C. Since by the definition, any fair clustering is also a pdc , we get 

dist( C, T ∗) ≤ dist( C, F∗). (3.57) Now, by the guarantee provided by Algorithm-A(), we get 

dist( C, T ) ≤ δ · dist( C, T ∗)

≤ δ · dist( C, F∗) (By Eq. (3.57)) . (3.58) Next, let C∗ be an (arbitrary) closest fair clustering of T (recall, T is an output of Algorithm-A()). Then, by the guarantee provided by Algorithm-B(), we get 

dist( T , F) ≤ α · dist( T , C∗)

≤ α · dist( T , F∗) (Since F∗ is a valid fair clustering) 

≤ α · (dist( T , C) + dist( C, F∗)) (By the triangle inequality) 

≤ α(δ + 1) · dist( C, F∗) (By Eq. (3.58)) . (3.59) Thus, finally, we deduce that 

dist( C, F) ≤ dist( C, T ) + dist( T , F) (By the triangle inequality) 

≤ δ · dist( C, F∗) + α(δ + 1) · dist( C, F∗) (By Eq. (3.58) and Eq. (3.59)) 

= ( δ + α + δα ) · dist( C, F∗)

and that concludes the proof. 

# 3.4 Hardness of Closest Fair Clustering Problem 

In this section, we prove that given a clustering C over a set of n red-blue colored vertices where the ratio between the total number of blue and red vertices is p for some integer p > 1, the problem of finding a Closest fair clustering F∗ is NP -hard. More specifically, we prove Theorem 5, which we restate below. 

Theorem 5. The closest fair clustering problem is NP -hard when the vertex set V is divided into two disjoint groups, blue and red, and the number of blue vertices is p times the number of red vertices, for some integer p > 1.

Let us start by defining the corresponding decision version of the problem. 

Definition 3.4.1 (closest p-fair ). Consider a positive integer p. Given a clustering C over a set of red-blue colored vertices where the ratio between the total number of blue and red vertices is p,and a non-negative integer τ , decide between the following: 

• YES: There exists a fair clustering (on input vertex set) F such that dist( C, F) ≤ τ ;

• NO: For every fair clustering (on input vertex set) F, dist( C, F) > τ .81 We show the following theorem. 

Lemma 3.4.2. For any integer p ≥ 2, the closest p-fair problem is NP -complete. 

It is immediate from Lemma 3.4.2 that Theorem 5 follows as a direct consequence. Hence, we focus on establishing Lemma 3.4.2. Observe that the closest p-fair problem clearly belongs to the class NP . To prove its NP -hardness, we present a polynomial-time reduction from the well-known 3-Partition problem (defined below) to closest p-fair . This reduction establishes that closest p-fair is NP -complete. 

Definition 3.4.3 (3-Partition problem) . Given a (multi)set of positive integers S = {x1, . . . , x n},decide whether (YES:) there exists a partition of S into m (disjoint) subsets S1, S 2, . . . , S m ⊆ S

where m = n/ 3, such that 

• For all i, |Si| = 3 ; and 

• For all i, P  

> xj∈Si

xj = T , where T =   

> P
> xj∈Sxj
> n/ 3

,or (NO:) no such partition exists. Note that, by partition of S we mean Si ∩ Sj = ∅ for all i̸ = j and Smi=1 Si = S.We know that the 3-Partition problem is in fact strongly NP -complete [GJ75], i.e., the 3-Partition problem remains NP -complete even if all the integers xi ∈ S are bounded by a polynomial in n;more specifically, max xi∈S xi ≤ nc for some non-negative constant c. Furthermore, the 3-Partition problem remains strongly NP -complete even when for all xi ∈ S, xi ∈ (T / 4, T / 2) , where T =

> 3
> n

P 

> xi∈S

xi [GJ75]. From now on, we refer to this restricted (with a restriction that each xi ∈

(T / 4, T / 2) ) variant of the 3-partition problem as the 3partition problem. 

Theorem 15. ([GJ75]) 3partition is strongly NP -complete. 

We divide our NP -hardness proof into two parts. First, we prove closest p-fair is NP -hard for any integer p ≥ 3, and then we prove closest p-fair is NP -hard also for p = 2 using a slightly different reduction. 

3.4.1 Hardness of closest p-fair for p ≥ 3:

In this section, we prove the following lemma. 

Lemma 3.4.4. For any integer p ≥ 3, the closest p-fair problem is NP -hard. 

To prove Lemma 3.4.4, we show a reduction from 3partition to closest p-fair .

Reduction from 3partition to closest p-fair : Let us consider a 3partition instance 

S = {x1, x 2, . . . , x n}, where for all i ∈ [n], xi ≤ nc, for some non-negative constant c. Given the 

3partition instance S = {x1, x 2, . . . , x n} we create a closest p-fair instance (C, τ ) as follows: 

• C = {B1, . . . , B n/ 3, R 1, . . . , R n}, where for each i ∈ { 1, . . . , n/ 3}, Bi is a monochromatic blue cluster (i.e., containing only blue vertices) of size pT and for each j ∈ { 1, . . . , n }, Rj is a monochromatic red cluster (i.e., containing only red vertices) of size xj (i.e., |Rj | = xj ); 82 •

τ = 12

> n

X

> j=1

xj (T − xj ) + n

3 pT 2.

Since each xi ≤ nc, the size of the instance (C, τ ) is polynomial in n. Moreover, it is straight-forward to see that the reduction runs in polynomial time. Now, we argue that the above reduction maps a YES instance of the 3partition to a YES instance of the closest p-fair .

Lemma 3.4.5. If S is a YES instance of the 3partition , then (C, τ ) is also a YES instance of the closest p-fair .Proof. Suppose S is a YES instance of the 3partition . Then there exists a partition 

S1, S 2, . . . , S n/ 3 of S = {x1, x 2, . . . , x n} such that for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n/ 3, |Si| = 3 and 

X 

> xj∈Si

xj = T where T =

P  

> xk∈S

xkn

> 3

.

Let, Si = {xi1 , x i2 , x i3 }. By our construction of (C, τ ), we have |Rij | = xij , for j ∈ { 1, 2, 3}.Now, we construct a fair clustering F by merging each Bi with Ri1 , R i2 , R i3 . More formally, 

F =

Bi ∪ [

> j∈{ 1,2,3}

Rij

 i ∈ [n/ 3] 

 .

Note that F is a fair clustering because for each cluster F ∈ F we have |blue (F ) | = pT (since 

blue (F ) = Bi for some i ∈ [n/ 3] ) and 

|red (F ) | = X

> j∈{ 1,2,3}

|Rij | = X

> j∈{ 1,2,3}

xij = T. 

Next, we claim that 

dist( C, F) = 12

> n

X

> j=1

xj (T − xj ) + n

3 pT 2 = τ. 

• Reason behind the term 12

Pnj=1 xj (T − xj ): In F, each red cluster Rj is merged with 

(T − | Rj |) red vertices from other clusters. This expression counts the number of such pairs. 

1/2 comes from the fact that we are counting a pair twice, once while considering the cluster 

Rj and again while considering a cluster Rj′ , for j′̸ = j, that is merged with Rj . (One important thing to note is that since S is a YES instance of the 3partition , we do not need to cut any red cluster Rj in C to form the fair clustering F.) 

• Reason behind the term (n/ 3) pT 2: To form each cluster of F we have merged T red vertices with pT blue vertices. We have n/ 3 clusters in F, hence the number of such pairs in total is (n/ 3) pT 2.Hence, (C, τ ) is a YES instance of the closest p-fair .83 Now, we argue that our reduction maps a NO instance of the 3partition to a NO instance of the closest p-fair .

Lemma 3.4.6. For p ≥ 3, if S is a NO instance of the 3partition , then (C, τ ) is also a NO instance of the closest p-fair .Proof. To prove (C, τ ) is a NO instance of the closest p-fair we consider an (arbitrary) closest fair clustering F∗ to C, and then argue that dist( C, F∗) > τ .Let us recall, S = {x1, . . . , x n}, C = {B1, . . . , B n/ 3, R 1, . . . , R n} where Bi’s are monochromatic blue clusters each of size pT , where T = P 

> xi∈S

xi/(n/ 3) and for each ℓ ∈ [n], Rℓ is a monochromatic red cluster of size xℓ.To prove dist( C, F∗) > τ we prove the following claim regarding the structure of F∗ when p ≥ 3.

Claim 3.4.7. Consider any integer p ≥ 3. Then, for all Bi, there exists Fa ∈ F ∗ such that blue (Fa) = Bi.

For now, let us assume the above claim and prove Lemma 3.4.6. Since, the number of monochro-matic blue clusters in C is n/ 3, assuming Claim 3.4.7 we get |F ∗| = n/ 3.According to the definition of consensus metric, dist( C, F∗) counts total number of pairs (u, v )

that are together in C but separated by F∗ and the number of pairs (u, v ) that are in different clusters in C but together in F∗.For a cluster Fa ∈ F ∗, let us define cost (Fa) to be the number of pairs u, v such that u, v ∈ Fa

but in different clusters in C.Formally, we define cost (Fa) as 

cost (Fa) := |{ (u, v ) | u, v ∈ Fa but u ∈ Ci, v ∈ Cj , C i, C j ∈ C , i ̸ = j}| .

It is easy to verify that 

cost (Fa) = pT 2 + 12

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |(T − | Ra,ℓ |)

where Ra,ℓ = Rℓ ∩ Fa.In the above expression, pT 2 counts the number of blue-red pairs in Fa, note by assuming Claim 3.4.7 we have |blue (Fa) | = pT and since Fa is fair we have |red (Fa) | = T . In the above expression (1 /2 · Pnℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ |(T − | Ra,ℓ |)) counts the number of red-red pairs (u, v ) ∈ Fa such that 

u ∈ Rℓ1 and v ∈ Rℓ2 for ℓ1̸ = ℓ2.It is straightforward to observe 

dist( C, F∗) ≥ X

> Fa∈F ∗

cost (Fa).

Now we prove 

X

> Fa∈F ∗

cost (Fa) > τ. 

For that purpose, we use the following claim, the proof of which is provided later. 

Claim 3.4.8. For each ℓ ∈ [n], let mℓ = max a:Fa∈F ∗ |Ra,ℓ |. There exists an ℓ ∈ [n] such that 

mℓ < x ℓ.

84 So, from now on, we assume the above claim and proceed with arguing P 

> Fa∈F ∗

cost (Fa) > τ .

X

> Fa∈F ∗

cost (Fa) = X

> Fa∈F ∗

pT 2 + 12

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |(T − | Ra,ℓ |)

!

= n

3 pT 2 + 12

X

> Fa∈F ∗
> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |(T − | Ra,ℓ |)

≥ n

3 pT 2 +

> n

X

> ℓ=1

(T − mℓ) X

> Fa∈F ∗

|Ra,ℓ | (recall mℓ = max  

> a

|Ra,ℓ |)= n

3 pT 2 +

> n

X

> ℓ=1

(T − mℓ)|Rℓ|

= n

3 pT 2 +

> n

X

> ℓ=1

(T − mℓ)xℓ (recall xℓ = |Rℓ|)

> n

3 pT 2 +

> n

X

> ℓ=1

(T − xℓ)xℓ = τ

where the last inequality follows from Claim 3.4.8. Thus we get that dist( C, F∗) > τ , which implies (C, τ ) is a NO instance of the closest p-fair .We are now left with proving Claim 3.4.7 and Claim 3.4.8. Let us first show Claim 3.4.8. 

Proof of Claim 3.4.8. For the sake of contradiction, suppose for all ℓ, mℓ = xℓ. Note mℓ ≤ xℓ

because 

mℓ = max  

> a

|Ra,ℓ |, and 

X

> Fa∈F ∗

|Ra,ℓ | = xℓ. (3.60) If mℓ = xℓ, then it immediately follows from the definition, 

∃a : |Ra,ℓ | = xℓ, and ∀b̸=a, |Rb,ℓ | = 0 . (3.61) Now we create partitions Sa of S in the following way: For each Fa ∈ F ∗,

Sa = {xℓ | | Ra,ℓ | = xℓ}.

Since by Claim 3.4.7, there are n/ 3 clusters Fa ∈ F ∗, the number of such subsets would be n/ 3.Clearly, the above subsets Sa’s create a partitioning of S, that is 

• Sa ∩ Sb = ∅ for a̸ = b, follows from Eq. (3.61); 

• S Sa = S, follows from Eq. (3.60) (that says Ra,ℓ cannot be empty for all a). 85 Since for each a, Fa is a fair cluster containing pT blue vertices (by Claim 3.4.7) and Ra,ℓ =

Rℓ ∩ Fa, we have that for all a,

X

> xℓ∈Sa

xℓ = T. 

Further, since xℓ ∈ (T / 4, T / 2) , we must have |Sa| = 3 . However, since S is a NO instance of 

3partition , such a partitioning of S does not exist, leading to a contradiction. Hence, there must exist an ℓ such that mℓ < x ℓ.It only remains to prove Claim 3.4.7. Recall here, our goal is to prove that for every Fi ∈ F ∗, there exists a monochromatic blue cluster Bj such that blue (Fi) = Bj . Before proceeding with the proof, we briefly outline the main steps. First, we show that for any Fi ∈ F ∗, if there exists a monochromatic blue cluster Bj such that |Bj ∩ Fi| is a multiple of p, then for all k̸ = j, we must have Bk ∩ Fi = ∅. Next, we prove that for every Fi ∈ F ∗, there exists some Bj such that |Bj ∩ Fi| is a multiple of p. Combining these two claims, we conclude the proof of Claim 3.4.7. 

Proof of Claim 3.4.7. For a cluster Bi, suppose it is partitioned into Y 1 

> i

, Y 2 

> i

, . . . , Y ti in F∗ that is 

• Y ki ⊆ F for some F ∈ F ∗ for all k ∈ [t]

• For k̸ = ℓ ∈ [t] if Y ki ⊆ Fa and Y ℓi ⊆ Fb then a̸ = b for some Fa, F b ∈ F ∗.

• Y ki ∩ Y ℓi = ∅ for k̸ = ℓ.

• S 

> k

Y ki = Bi.Now, we argue that if for a cluster Bi, there exists Y ki ⊆ F for some F ∈ F ∗ such that p divides 

|Y ki |, then F does not contain blue vertices from any other cluster Bj .

Claim 3.4.9. Consider any integer p > 1. Suppose for a cluster Bi, there exists Y ki ⊆ F for some 

F ∈ F ∗ such that p divides |Y ki |, then blue (F ) = Y ki .Proof. For the sake of contradiction, suppose there exists a cluster F ∈ F ∗ such that Y ki ⊆ F and 

p divides |Y ki |, but Bj ∩ F̸ = ∅ for some j̸ = i. In this case, we can construct a fair clustering M

such that dist( C, M) < dist( C, F∗) which contradicts the fact that F∗ is a closest fair clustering. 

Construction of M from F∗: Let Q ⊆ red (F ) such that |Q| = |Y ki |/p .

M = F∗ \ { F } ∪ { (Y ki ∪ Q), F \ (Y ki ∪ Q)}.

That is, in M we remove the cluster F from F∗ and add two clusters (Y ki ∪Q) and (F \(Y ki ∪Q)) .Since F is a fair cluster, both the clusters (Y ki ∪ Q) and F \ (Y ki ∪ Q) are fair. Let us now argue that dist( C, M) < dist( C, F∗). Roughly, the above construction only incurs an additional cost for pairs between Q and red (F ) \ Q, while saving a cost for pairs between Q and 

blue (F ) \ Y ki (note, blue (F ) \ Y ki = blue (F ) \ Bi). Further, note that |blue (F ) \ Bi| = p|red (F ) \ Q|.Thus, 

dist( C, M) ≤ dist( C, F∗) + |Q|| red (F ) \ Q| − p|Q|| red (F ) \ Q|

86 < dist( C, F∗) (for p > 1).

Now, we prove that for all Bi and for all k ∈ [t], |Y ki | must be a multiple of p. To prove this, we first establish the following two claims. 

Claim 3.4.10. Consider any integer p > 1. If for a cluster F ∈ F ∗, |Bi ∩ blue (F ) | < p for all Bi,then |blue (F ) | ≤ p.Proof. Consider any cluster F ∈ F ∗. For any Bi, let Yi := Bi ∩ blue (F ). WLOG assume |Y1| ≥ |Y2| ≥ · · · ≥ | Yn|. No, suppose for all i ∈ [n], |Yi| < p .For the sake of contradiction, suppose |blue (F ) | > p . Then, there must exist an index x ∈ [n]

such that 

> x−1

X

> i=1

|Yi| ≤ p < 

> x

X

> i=1

|Yi|.

Note x ≥ 2 because |Yi| < p for all i.Let Y ′ 

> x

⊆ Yx such that Px−1 

> i=1

|Yi| + |Y ′

> x

| = p. Now, since |Y1| ≥ | Yx| ≥ | Y ′

> x

|, |Y ′

> x

| ≤ p/ 2.Next, we construct M from F∗ in the following way 

M = F∗ \ { F } ∪ 

( x−1[

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′ 

> x

∪ Q

!

, F \

> x−1

[

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′ 

> x

∪ Q

!!) 

where Q ⊆ red (F ) such that |Q| = 1 .That is, in M we remove the set F from F∗ and add two clusters 

Sx−1 

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′ 

> x

∪ Q



and 



F \

Sx−1 

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′ 

> x

∪ Q

 

.It is easy to see that M is a fair clustering. Next, 

dist( C, M) ≤ dist( C, F∗) + |Y ′

> x

|| Yx \ Y ′

> x

| + |Q|| red (F ) \ Q| − 

> x−1

[

> i=1

Yi |Yx \ Y ′

> x

| − | Q| blue (F ) \

> x−1

[

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′

> x

!

≤ dist( C, F∗) + |Y ′

> x

|(|Yx| − | Y ′

> x

|) + |Q|| red (F ) \ Q| − (p − | Y ′

> x

|)( |Yx| − | Y ′

> x

|) − | Q| · p|red (F ) \ Q|

(as blue (F ) \

> x−1

[

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′

> x

!

≥ p|red (F ) \ Q|)

< dist( C, F∗) ( as |Y ′

> x

| ≤ p

2 and |red (F ) \ Q| < p |red (F ) \ Q| for p > 1) 

contradicting the fact that F∗ is a closest fair clustering to C.

• Reason behind the term |Y ′

> x

|| Yx \ Y ′

> x

|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Y ′ 

> x

and v ∈ Yx \ Y ′

> x

are not counted in dist( C, F∗) because the pairs u and v may lie in the same cluster both in Bi ∈ C and F ∈ F ∗. These pairs are counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters in M.87 • Reason behind the term |Q|| red (F ) \ Q|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Q and v ∈

red (F ) \ Q may not be counted in dist( C, F∗) because the pairs u and v may lie in the same cluster both in C and F∗. These pairs are counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters in M.

• Reason behind the term Sx−1 

> i=1

Yi |Yx \ Y ′

> x

|: First note that, Sx−1 

> i=1

Yi̸ = ∅ as x ≥ 2.The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Sx−1 

> i=1

Yi and v ∈ Yx \ Y ′ 

> x

are counted in dist( C, F∗) because the pairs (u, v ) lie in different clusters in C but in the same cluster F ∈ F ∗. These pairs are not counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters both in C and M.

• Reason behind the term |Q| blue (F ) \

Sx−1 

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′

> x



: The pairs (u, v ) such that 

u ∈ Q and v ∈ blue (F ) \

Sx−1 

> i=1

Yi ∪ Y ′

> x



are counted in dist( C, F∗) because the pairs (u, v )

lie in different clusters in C but in the same cluster F ∈ F ∗. These pairs are not counted in 

dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters both in C and M.

Claim 3.4.11. Consider any integer p > 1. If there exists a cluster Bi such that |Bi ∩ F | ≥ p for some F ∈ F ∗, then |blue (F ) \ Bi| ≤ p − (|Bi ∩ F | mod p).Proof. Let Yi = Bi ∩ F . Suppose for the sake of contradiction, |blue (F ) \ Bi| > p − (|Yi| mod p).In that case, we construct M from F∗ in the following way: 

M = F∗ \ { F } ∪ { (Yi ∪ W ∪ Q), F \ (Yi ∪ W ∪ Q)}

where W ⊆ blue (F )\Yi such that |W | = p−(|Yi| mod p) and Q ⊆ red (F ) such that |Q| = |Yi∪W |/p 

(note, |Yi ∪ W | is a multiple of p). That is, in M we remove the set F from F∗ and add two clusters (Yi ∪W ∪Q) and F \(Yi ∪W ∪Q).By the construction, M is a fair clustering. Observe that |Yi| = |Bi ∩ F | ≥ p > |W |. Then, 

dist( C, M) ≤ dist( C, F∗) + |W || blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )| + |Q|| red (F ) \ Q|− | Yi|| blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )| − | Q|| blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )|≤ dist( C, F∗) + |W || blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )| + |Q|| red (F ) \ Q|− | Yi|| blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )| − | Q| · p|red (F ) \ Q|

< dist( C, F∗) ( since p > 1 and |Yi| > |W |)

contradicting the fact that F∗ is a closest fair clustering to C.

• Reason behind the term |W || blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ W and 

v ∈ blue (F )\(Yi ∪W ) may not be counted in dist( C, F∗) because they may lie in same clusters both in C and F∗. They are counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters in M.

• Reason behind the term |Q|| red (F ) \ Q|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Q and v ∈

red (F ) \ Q may not be counted in dist( C, F∗) because they may lie in same clusters both in 

C and F∗. They are counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters in M.88 • Reason behind the term |Yi|| blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Yi and 

v ∈ blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W ) are counted in dist( C, F∗) because they lie in different clusters in C

but the same cluster F ∈ F ∗. They are not counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters both in C and M.

• Reason behind the term |Q|| blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W )|: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Q and 

v ∈ blue (F ) \ (Yi ∪ W ) are counted in dist( C, F∗) because they lie in different clusters in C but in the same cluster F ∈ F ∗. They are not counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in different clusters both in C and M.We are now ready to prove that for all Bi, for all k ∈ [t], |Y ki | must be a multiple of p.

Claim 3.4.12. Consider any integer p > 1. For all Bi, for all k ∈ [t], |Y ki | is a multiple of p.Proof. Suppose there exists m1, . . . , m z such that |Y mw 

> i

| is not a multiple of p for w ∈ [z]. In this case, we can construct a fair clustering M such that dist( C, M) < dist( C, F∗) which would contradict F∗ is a closest fair clustering to C.Let, Y mw 

> i

⊆ Fw ∈ F ∗ for all w ∈ [z]. WLOG, assume |Y mx 

> i

| ≥ | Y my 

> i

| if mx < m y. Thus Y m1 

> i

is the partition of Bi of largest size. Before providing the construction of M let us prove there exists a Bi such that |blue (F1)\Y m1 

> i

| ≤ |Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

|.

• Case 1: ∃Bi, |Y m1 

> i

| ≥ p:In this case we know by Claim 3.4.11 that |blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

| ≤ p − (|Y m1 

> i

| mod p).Further, note that |Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

| ≥ p−(|Y m1 

> i

| mod p). Hence, |blue (F1)\Y m1 

> i

| ≤ | Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

|.

• Case 2: For all Bj , |Y m1 

> j

| < p :Fix any cluster Bi.Since for all Bj , |Y m1 

> j

| < p , we get that for all Bj , |Bj ∩ F1| < p . Then by Claim 3.4.10, we get |blue (F1) | ≤ p.Thus, |blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

| ≤ p − | Y m1 

> i

|.Further note that, | Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

| ≥ p − | Y m1 

> i

|.Hence, |blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

| ≤ | Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

|.Next, we provide a construction of M from F∗. Consider a cluster Bi for which |blue (F1) \

Y m1 

> i

| ≤ | Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

|, the existence of which is already argued. In this case, informally, we want to construct a clustering M by swapping the locations of blue vertices in blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

with an equal number of blue vertices present in Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

. We choose an equal number of blue vertices to |blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

| in Szw=2 Y mw 

> i

greedily starting from Y m2 

> i

.Formally, we do the following operation: First, we find an index x such that 

> x−1

X

> w=2

|Y mw 

> i

| < |blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

| ≤ 

> x

X

> w=2

|Y mw 

> i

|.

89 Let, Y m′ 

> x
> i

⊆ Y mx 

> i

such that 

|blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

| =

> x−1

X

> w=2

|Y mw 

> i

| + |Y m′ 

> x
> i

|.

Then, we divide the vertices in blue (F1)\Y m1 

> i

into (x−1) disjoint subsets Z1, Z 2, . . . , Z x−2, Z x−1

such that for 1 ≤ j ≤ (x − 2) we have |Zj | = |Y mj+1  

> i

| and |Zx−1| = |Y m′ 

> x
> i

|.

Construction of M from F∗:

M =F∗ \ { Fw | 1 ≤ w ≤ x} ∪ { (Fw \ Y mw 

> i

) ∪ Zw−1 | 2 ≤ w ≤ (x − 1) }∪ { (Fx \ Y m′ 

> x
> i

) ∪ Zx−1} ∪ 

(

F1 \ (blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> i

) ∪

> x−1

[

> w=2

Y mw

> i

!

∪ Y m′

> x
> i

)

That is, in M, from each Fw for 2 ≤ w ≤ x − 1 we remove its subset Y mw 

> i

and add the set 

Zw−1 to it. From Fx we remove its subset Y m′ 

> x
> i

and add the set Zx−1 to it. From F1 we remove its subset (blue (F1) \ Y m1 

> 1

) and add the set 

Sx−1 

> w=2

Y mw

> i



∪ Y m′ 

> x
> i

to it. It is easy to observe that M is a fair clustering. Now, 

dist( C, M) ≤ dist( C, F∗) + |Zx−1|| Y mx 

> i

\ Y m′ 

> x
> i

| + |Y m′ 

> x
> i

|| Y mx 

> i

\ Y m′ 

> x
> i

|

+

 X

> r<w ∈[x−2]

|Zr|| Zw| + |Zx−1| X

> w∈[x−2]

|Zw|



− | Zx−1|| Y m1 

> i

| − | Y m′ 

> x
> i

|| Y m1 

> i

| − 

 X 

> r<w ∈{ 2,··· ,x −1}

|Y mr 

> i

|| Y mw 

> i

| + |Y m′ 

> x
> i

| X 

> w∈{ 2,··· ,x −1}

|Y mw 

> i

|



< dist( C, F∗)

where the last inequality follows since 

|Y m1 

> i

| > (|Y mx 

> i

\ Y m′ 

> x
> i

|, and 

X

> r<w ∈[x−2]

|Zr|| Zw| + |Zx−1| X

> w∈[x−2]

|Zw| = X 

> r<w ∈{ 2,··· ,x −1}

|Y mr 

> i

|| Y mw 

> i

| + |Y m′ 

> x
> i

| X 

> w∈{ 2,··· ,x −1}

|Y mw 

> i

|.

This contradicts the fact that F∗ is a closest fair clustering to C.

• Reason behind the term |Zx−1|| Y mx 

> i

\ Y m′ 

> x
> i

|: In dist( C, F∗) the pairs (u, v ) such that 

u ∈ Zx−1 and v ∈ Y mx 

> i

\ Y m′ 

> x
> i

are not counted because they are in different clusters both in C and F∗ but these pairs are counted in dist( C, M) because they are in the same cluster 

{(Fx \ Y m′ 

> x
> i

) ∪ Zx−1} in M.90 • Reason behind the term |Y m′ 

> x
> i

|| Y mx 

> i

\ Y m′ 

> x
> i

|: In dist( C, F∗) the pairs (u, v ) such that 

u ∈ Y m′ 

> x
> i

and v ∈ Y mx 

> i

\ Y m′ 

> x
> i

are not counted because they are in same clusters both in C and 

F∗ but these pairs are counted in dist( C, M) because they are in different clusters in M.

• Reason behind the term 

P 

> r<w ∈[x−2]

|Zr|| Zw| + |Zx−1| P 

> w∈[x−2]

|Zw|



: In 

dist( C, F∗) the pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Zr and v ∈ Zw for r < w may not be counted because they may be in same clusters both in C and F∗ but these pairs are counted in 

dist( C, M) because they are in different clusters in M.

• Reason behind the term |Zx−1|| Y m1 

> i

|: In dist( C, F∗) the pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Zx−1

and v ∈ Y m1 

> i

are counted because they are in different clusters in C but in the same cluster 

F1 in F∗ but these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M) because they are in different clusters both in C and M.

• Reason behind the term |Y m′ 

> x
> i

|| Y m1 

> i

|: In dist( C, F∗) the pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Y m′

> x
> i

and v ∈ Y m1 

> i

are counted because they are in different clusters in F∗ but in the same cluster 

Bi in C but these pairs are not counted in dist( C, M) because they are in the same clusters both in C and M.

• Reason behind the term 

P  

> r<w ∈{ 2,··· ,x −1}

|Y mr 

> i

|| Y mw 

> i

| + |Y m′ 

> x
> i

| P  

> w∈{ 2,··· ,x −1}

|Y mw 

> i

|



:

In dist( C, F∗) the pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Y mr 

> i

and v ∈ Y mw 

> i

for r < w where 

r, w ∈ { 2, . . . , (x − 1) } or u ∈ Y m′ 

> x
> i

and v ∈ Y mw 

> i

where w ∈ { 2, . . . , x − 1} are counted because they are in the same cluster Bi in C but different clusters in F∗. These pairs are not counted in dist( C, M) because they are in the same cluster in M.Next, we complete the proof of Claim 3.4.7. 

Proof of Claim 3.4.7. Suppose a cluster Bi is split into t parts Y 1 

> i

, Y 2 

> i

, . . . , Y ti in F∗. In this claim, we would like to show that t = 1 . For the sake of contradiction, assume t ≥ 2. By Claim 3.4.12 we get p divides |Y ki |, for all k ∈ [t].For each k ∈ [t], let Y ki ⊆ Fak for some Fak ∈ F ∗. By Claim 3.4.9, we know that blue (Fak ) = 

Y ki . Next, we argue that since t ≥ 2, we can construct a fair clustering M from F∗ such that 

dist( C, M) < dist( C, F∗) contradicting the fact that F∗ is a closest fair clustering to C.

Construction of M:

M = F∗ \ { Fak ∈ F ∗ | k ∈ [t]} ∪ 

[

> k∈[t]

Fak

 .

That is, while constructing M, we remove all the clusters Fa from F∗ if Y ki ⊆ Fa for some 

k ∈ [t] and add one cluster by merging all these clusters. By the construction, clearly M is a fair clustering. Next, we argue that dist( C, M) < dist( C, F∗) for p ≥ 3.

dist( C, M) ≤ dist( C, F∗) + X 

> k̸=ℓ

|blue (Fak ) || red (Faℓ ) | + X

> k<ℓ

|red (Fak ) || red (Faℓ ) | − X

> k<ℓ

|blue (Fak ) || blue (Faℓ ) |

91 = dist( C, F∗) + X 

> k̸=ℓ

|Y ki || Y ℓi |

p + X

> k<ℓ

|Y ki |

p

|Y ℓi |

p − X

> k<ℓ

|Y ki || Y ℓi |



as ∀k blue (Fak ) = Y ki , by Claim 3.4.9, and |red (Fak ) | = |Y ki |

p



= dist( C, F∗) + 2 X

> k<ℓ

|Y ki || Y ℓi |

p + X

> k<ℓ

|Y ki |

p

|Y ℓi |

p − X

> k<ℓ

|Y ki || Y ℓi |

< dist( C, F∗) ( for p ≥ 3) .

• Reason behind the term P  

> k̸=ℓ

|blue (Fak ) || red (Faℓ ) |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈

blue (Fak ) and v ∈ red (Faℓ ) (for k̸ = ℓ) may not be counted in dist( C, F∗) because u and v

may lie in different clusters both in C and F∗. These pairs are counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in the same cluster in M.

• Reason behind the term P 

> k<ℓ

|red (Fak ) || red (Faℓ ) |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈

red (Fak ) and v ∈ red (Faℓ ) (for k < ℓ ) may not be counted in dist( C, F∗) because u and v may lie in different clusters both in C and F∗. These pairs are counted in dist( C, M) because they lie in the same cluster in M.

• Reason behind the term P 

> k<ℓ

|blue (Fak ) || blue (Faℓ ) |: The pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈

blue (Fak ) and v ∈ blue (Faℓ ) (for k < ℓ ) are counted in dist( C, F∗) because u and v lie in the same cluster Bi ∈ C but different clusters in F∗. These pairs are not counted in dist( C, M)

because they lie in the same cluster in M.We now conclude the proof of Lemma 3.4.4. 

Proof of Lemma 3.4.4. By Lemma 3.4.5 and Lemma 3.4.6 we infer that for any p ≥ 3, S is a YES instance of the 3partition if and only if (C, τ ) is a YES instance of the closest p-fair . It now immediately follows from our reduction that for any p ≥ 3, closest p-fair is NP -hard because 

3partition is strongly NP -complete (Theorem 15). 

Remark 3.4.13 . We would like to remark that the above NP -hardness proof can be extended for any fixed p/q ratio on the input blue to red vertices as long as p/q > 1 + √2. More specifically, consider any two integers p, q ≥ 2 such that p/q > 1 + √2. Then the closest fair clustering problem on red-blue colored vertices where the ratio between the total number of blue and red vertices is 

p/q , is NP -hard. We can show this result by making the following modifications to the reduction: Take monochromatic red clusters Ri’s of size qx i, set τ = q2

> 2

Pnj=1 xj (T − xj ) + n 

> 3

pqT 2; everything else remain the same. The proof argument will be similar. One important vertex to note is that 

p/q > 1 + √2 is crucial for the argument used in the proof of Claim 3.4.7. Now in the following paragraph, we prove that closest p-fair is NP -hard also for p = 2 .

3.4.2 Hardness of closest p-fair for p = 2 :

In this section, we prove the following lemma. 

Lemma 3.4.14. For p = 2 , the closest p-fair problem is NP -hard. 

92 We again reduce the 3partition problem to the closest p-fair problem for the case when 

p = 2 . The reduction follows the same structure as in the case where p ≥ 3, with the only difference being the choice of the parameter τ . For completeness, we restate the reduction here. 

Reduction from 3partition to closest p-fair : Consider a 3partition instance S =

{x1, x 2, . . . , x n}, where for all i ∈ [n], it holds that xi ≤ nc for some fixed non-negative constant c.Given this instance, we construct a corresponding closest p-fair instance (C, τ ) as follows: 

• Define the set of clusters as 

C = {B1, . . . , B n/ 3, R 1, . . . , R n},

where each Bi (for i ∈ { 1, . . . , n/ 3}) is a monochromatic blue cluster of size pT , and each Rj

(for j ∈ { 1, . . . , n }) is a monochromatic red cluster of size xj , i.e., |Rj | = xj .

• Set the value of τ as 

τ = p

> n

X

> ℓ=1

x2 

> ℓ

+ p2

2

> n

X

> ℓ=1

xℓ(T − xℓ)

Since, for all i ∈ [n], it holds that xi ≤ nc for some fixed non-negative constant c, it is straight-forward to see that the above reduction is a polynomial time reduction. Now, we argue that the above reduction maps a YES instance of the 3partition to a YES instance of the closest p-fair .

Lemma 3.4.15. If S is a YES instance of the 3partition , then (C, τ ) is also a YES instance of the closest p-fair .Proof. Suppose S is a YES instance of the 3partition . Then there exists a partition 

S1, S 2, . . . , S n/ 3 of S = {x1, x 2, . . . , x n} such that for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n/ 3, |Si| = 3 and 

X

> xℓ∈Si

xℓ = T where T =

P 

> xℓ∈S

xℓn

> 3

.

Let, Si = {xi1 , x i2 , x i3 }. By our construction of (C, τ ), we have |Riℓ | = xiℓ , for ℓ ∈ { 1, 2, 3}.Now, we construct a fair clustering F by merging Riℓ with p|Riℓ | blue vertices in Bi for ℓ ∈{1, 2, 3}. More formally, 

F = {(Biℓ ∪ Riℓ ) | i ∈ [n/ 3] , ℓ ∈ { 1, 2, 3}} .

where Biℓ ⊆ Bi such that |Biℓ | = p|Riℓ | for ℓ ∈ { 1, 2, 3}.Note that F is a fair clustering because for each cluster F ∈ F we have |blue (F ) | = p|red (F ) |.Next, we claim that 

dist( C, F) = p

> n

X

> ℓ=1

x2 

> ℓ

+ p2

2

> n

X

> ℓ=1

xℓ(T − xℓ) = τ. 

• Reason behind the term p Pnℓ=1 x2 

> ℓ

: In F, each red cluster Rℓ is merged with p|Rℓ| blue vertices from some cluster Bi. This expression counts the number of such blue-red pairs (recall 

|Rℓ| = xℓ). (One important thing to note is that since S is a YES instance of the 3partition ,we do not need to cut any red cluster Rℓ in C to form the fair clustering F.) 93 • Reason behind the term p2

> 2

Pnℓ=1 xℓ(T − xℓ): In F, each red cluster Rℓ is merged with 

p|Rℓ| blue vertices from some cluster Bi. Now, these p|Rℓ| blue vertices of Bi gets separated from other pT −p|Rℓ| blue vertices of Bi. This expression counts the number of such blue-blue pairs. In the above expression, 1/2 comes from the fact that we are counting a pair twice, once while considering the subset of Bi that consists of p|Rℓ| vertices and again while considering a subset of other (pT − p|Rℓ|) blue vertices of Bi.Hence, (C, τ ) is a YES instance of the closest p-fair .Now, we argue that our reduction maps a NO instance of the 3partition to a NO instance of the closest p-fair .

Lemma 3.4.16. For p = 2 , if S is a NO instance of the 3partition , then (C, τ ) is also a NO instance of the closest p-fair .Proof. Let F∗ be any arbitrary closest clustering to C. We prove that dist( C, F∗) > τ .By the definition, dist( C, F∗) counts the total number of pairs (u, v ) that are together in C but separated by F∗ and the number of pairs (u, v ) that are in different clusters in C but together in 

F∗.To count a pair (u, v ), we use a charging scheme. For each pair (u, v ) we charge the vertex u,

1/2 and the vertex v, 1/2.Let us define cost (v) to be half times the number of vertices u such that u, v are together in C

but separated by F∗, or u, v that are in different clusters in C but together in F∗. More specifically, 

cost (v) := 12 |{ u |u, v ∈ C, C ∈ C but u ∈ Fa, v ∈ Fb, F a, F b ∈ F ∗, a ̸ = b

or u, v ∈ Fa, F a ∈ F ∗, u ∈ Ci, v ∈ Cj , C i, C j ∈ C , i ̸ = j}| 

For a cluster Fa ∈ F ∗, let us define cost (Fa) (by abuse of notation) to be 

cost (Fa) := X

> v∈Fa

cost (v).

Observe that 

cost (Fa) = p

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |

!2

+ p2

2

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |

!

T −

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |

!

+ 12

X 

> ℓ1̸=ℓ2

|Ra,ℓ 1 || Ra,ℓ 2 | + 12

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ | (|Rℓ| − | Ra,ℓ |) (3.62) where Ra,ℓ = Rℓ ∩ Fa.

• Reason behind the term p  P nℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ |2: (Pnℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ |) is the number of red vertices in 

Fa. Since it is merged with p (Pnℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ |) blue vertices, hence the number of blue-red pairs in Fa is p (Pnℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ |)2.94 • Reason behind the term p2

> 2

 P nℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ |   T − Pnℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ |: By Claim 3.4.9 and Claim 3.4.12 we get that for all Fa ∈ F ∗, blue (Fa) ⊆ Bi for some Bi ∈ C . Hence, the vertices in blue (Fa) are separated from pT − | blue (Fa) | vertices in Bi. These blue-blue pairs are counted in this expression 

12 p

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |

!

pT − p

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |

!

= p2

2

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |

!

T −

> n

X

> ℓ=1

|Ra,ℓ |

!

In the above expression, 1/2 comes from the fact that for a pair (u, v ) we are charging 1/2

for the vertices u ∈ Fa while considering the cluster Fa and again we will charge 1/2 for the vertex v while considering a cluster Fb such that v ∈ blue (Fb), blue (Fb) ⊆ Bi and Fb̸ = Fa.

• Reason behind the term 12

P  

> ℓ1̸=ℓ2

|Ra,ℓ 1 || Ra,ℓ 2 |: This counts the number of red-red pairs 

(u, v ) in Fa such that u ∈ Rℓ1 and v ∈ Rℓ2 .

• Reason behind the term 12

Pnℓ=1 |Ra,ℓ | (|Rℓ| − | Ra,ℓ |): The term counts the number of pairs (u, v ) ∈ Rℓ such that u ∈ Rℓ ∩ Fa and v ∈ Rℓ ∩ Fb for Fb̸ = Fa. In the above expression, 

1/2 comes from the fact that for a pair (u, v ) we are charging 1/2 for the vertices u ∈ Rℓ ∩ Fa

while considering the cluster Fa and again we will charge 1/2 for the vertex v while considering a cluster Fb such that v ∈ Rℓ ∩ Fb.It is straightforward to observe 

dist( C, F∗) ≥ X

> Fa∈F ∗

cost (Fa).

Now we show that 

X

> Fa∈F ∗

cost (Fa) > τ. 

Let, xa,ℓ = |Ra,ℓ | and recall xℓ = |Rℓ|.

X

> Fa∈F ∗

cost (Fa)= p X

> Fa∈F ∗
> n

X

> ℓ=1

xa,ℓ 

!2

+ p2

2

X

> Fa∈F ∗
> n

X

> ℓ=1

xa,ℓ T −

> n

X

> ℓ=1

xa,ℓ 

!! 

+ 12

X

> Fa∈F ∗

X 

> ℓ1̸=ℓ2

xa,ℓ 1 xa,ℓ 2

+ 12

X

> Fa∈F ∗
> n

X

> ℓ=1

xℓ(xℓ − xa,ℓ )= p X

> Fa∈F ∗



> n

X

> ℓ=1

x2 

> a,ℓ

+ X 

> ℓ1̸=ℓ2

xa,ℓ 1 xa,ℓ 2

 + p2

2

X

> Fa∈F ∗
> n

X

> ℓ=1

xa,ℓ T −

> n

X

> ℓ=1

xa,ℓ 

!! 

+ 12

X

> Fa∈F ∗

X 

> ℓ1̸=ℓ2

xa,ℓ 1 xa,ℓ 2

95 + 12

nX

ℓ=1 

X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

= p X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

x2

a,ℓ + p2

2

X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

xa,ℓ (T − xa,ℓ )

!

+ 12

nX

ℓ=1 

X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

− p2

2

X

Fa∈F ∗

X

ℓ1̸ =ℓ2

xa,ℓ 1 xa,ℓ 2 +



p + 12

 X

Fa∈F ∗

X

ℓ1̸ =ℓ2

xa,ℓ 1 xa,ℓ 2

≥ p X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

x2

a,ℓ + p2

2

X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

xa,ℓ (T − xa,ℓ )

!

+ 12

nX

ℓ=1 

X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

(as p = 2) (3.63) 

= p X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

x2

a,ℓ + p2

2

X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

xa,ℓ (T − xℓ + ( xℓ − xa,ℓ )) 

!

+ 12

nX

ℓ=1 

X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

= p X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

x2

a,ℓ + p2

2

X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

xa,ℓ (xℓ − xa,ℓ ) + p2

2

X

Fa∈F ∗

nX

ℓ=1 

xa,ℓ (T − xℓ)+ 12

nX

ℓ=1 

X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

= p

nX

ℓ=1 

 X

Fa∈F ∗

x2

a,ℓ + p

2

X

Fa∈F ∗

xa,ℓ (xℓ − xa,ℓ ) + 12p

X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

 + p2

2

nX

ℓ=1 

(T − xℓ) X

Fa∈F ∗

xa,ℓ 

= p

nX

ℓ=1 

 X

Fa∈F ∗

x2

a,ℓ +

 p

2 + 12p

 X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

 + p2

2

nX

ℓ=1 

xℓ(T − xℓ)

> p 

nX

ℓ=1 

 X

Fa∈F ∗

x2

a,ℓ + X

Fa1̸ =Fa2

xa1,ℓ xa2,ℓ 

 + p2

2

nX

ℓ=1 

xℓ(T − xℓ) (3.64) 

= p

nX

ℓ=1 

x2

ℓ + p2

2

nX

ℓ=1 

xℓ(T − xℓ) = τ

The reason behind Eq. (3.64) is that (p/ 2 + 1 /2p) > 1 for p > 1 and there must exist at least one ℓ and Fa1 , Fa2 ∈ F ∗ such that xa1,ℓ , x a2,ℓ ̸ = 0 . We prove this in the following claim. 

Claim 3.4.17. There exists ℓ, a 1, a 2 such that xa1,ℓ , x a2,ℓ ̸ = 0 .Proof. For the sake of contradiction, suppose for all ℓ, there exists at most one Fa ∈ F ∗ such that 

xa,ℓ ̸ = 0 .Since P

Fa∈F ∗ xa,ℓ = xℓ, we have a cluster Fa ∈ F ∗ such that xa,ℓ = xℓ.Now we create partitions Si of S in the following way: For each Bi ∈ C ,

Si = {xℓ | xa,ℓ = xℓ and blue (Fa) ⊆ Bi}.

96 Note by Claim 3.4.9 and Claim 3.4.12 we get for each Fa ∈ F ∗ there must exist a Bi such that 

blue (Fa) ⊆ Bi.Since there are n/ 3 clusters Bi ∈ C , the number of such subsets would be n/ 3. Clearly, the above subsets Si’s create a partitioning of S, that is 

• Sa ∩ Sb = ∅ for a̸ = b (since, Bi ∩ Bj = ∅, hence, if blue (Fa) ⊆ Bi then blue (Fa)̸ ⊆ Bj for 

j̸ = i); 

• S Sa = S (since xa,ℓ cannot be zero for all a). Since |Bi| = pT and all clusters Fa ∈ F ∗ such that blue (Fa) ⊆ Bi are fair we have, 

X

> xℓ∈Si

xℓ = T. 

Further, since each xℓ ∈ (T / 4, T / 2) , we must have |Si| = 3 . However, since S is a NO instance of 3partition , such a partitioning of S does not exist, leading to a contradiction. Hence, we conclude that there must exist ℓ, a 1, a 2 such that xa1,ℓ , x a2,ℓ ̸ = 0 .Thus we finally get that dist( C, F∗) > τ , which implies (C, τ ) is a NO instance of the 

closest p-fair , for p = 2 .Similar to the proof of Lemma 3.4.4, we conclude the proof of Lemma 3.4.14. 

Proof of Lemma 3.4.14. By Lemma 3.4.15 and Lemma 3.4.16 we infer that for any p = 2 , S is a YES instance of the 3partition if and only if (C, τ ) is a YES instance of the closest p-fair .It now immediately follows from our reduction that for any p = 2 , closest p-fair is NP -hard because 3partition is strongly NP -complete ( Theorem 15). 

Remark 3.4.18 . We would like to remark that the above NP -hardness proof can be extended for any fixed ratio (between the number of blue and red vertices) of p/q where 1 < p/q ≤ (1 + √2) with modifications in the reduction mentioned in Remark 3.4.13, with τ being set to τ = pq Pnℓ=1 x2 

> ℓ

+

> p2
> 2

Pnℓ=1 xℓ(T −xℓ). The reason behind this is that Eq. (3.63) holds for any ratio p ∈ [1 −√2, 1+ √2] ,and while expressing cost (Fa) in Eq. (3.62) we use Claim 3.4.9 and Claim 3.4.12, both of which also hold for any p, q > 1.From Lemma 3.4.4 and Lemma 3.4.14 we conclude Lemma 3.4.2. 97 Chapter 4 

# Closest Fair Clustering with more than Two Colors 

In this chapter, we find an approximate closest fair clustering to given clustering C, when the vertex set V is divided into multiple colored disjoint groups χ = {c1, . . . , c d}. We use the notation σ(v) to denote the color assigned to v from χ.

# 4.1 Approximate Closest Fair Clustering for Equi-Proportion Groups 

In this section, we provide an approximation algorithm to find a closest fair clustering when all the groups are of equal size. More specifically we prove Theorem 6, which we restate below. 

Theorem 6. Let χ be a set of colors and let V be partitioned into disjoint color classes indexed by χ, such that each color class has the same size and |χ| > 2, then there exists a polynomial-time algorithm that computes an O(|χ|1.6 log 2.81 |χ|)-close fair clustering with respect to a given input clustering C. Moreover, when |χ| is a power of two, the algorithm computes a O(|χ|1.6)-close fair clustering. 

First, let us handle the case when |χ| is a power of 2. To do that, we provide an algorithm 

fairpower-of-two , which produces an O(|χ|1.6)-close fair clustering Ffpt to a clustering C when |χ|

is a power of 2.

4.1.1 Details of the Algorithm: Power-of-Two Colors 

Let the input of the algorithm fairpower-of-two be a clustering C = {C1, C 2, . . . , C m}, where each cluster Ca ∈ C consists of points colored from a color set χ = {c1, c 2, . . . , c d}. We assume that the number of colors |χ| is a power of two. The goal is to produce a fair clustering Ffpt such that, in each cluster Fa ∈ F fpt , the number of points of each color is equal, that is cp(Fa) = cq(Fa) where p̸ = q and cr(Fa) denotes the number of points of color cr in Fa.The algorithm proceeds in log |χ| iterations, indexed by i = 1 to log |χ|. In each iteration, the color set χ = {c1, . . . , c |χ|} is partitioned into blocks of size 2i:

Bij = {c(j−1) ·2i+1 , . . . , c j·2i }, for j = 1 , . . . , |χ|/2i.

98 (Note: This defines |χ|/2i blocks in total.) Let, after iteration i of the algorithm fairpower-of-two the input clustering C is changed to a clustering N i. The algorithm fairpower-of-two at each iteration i maintains an invariant that for every block Bij and for every cluster N ia ∈ N i, the number of points of each color within Bij is equal in N ia. Formally, for all x, y ∈ { 1, . . . , 2i} with x̸ = y, we have: 

c(j−1) ·2i+x(N ia) = c(j−1) ·2i+y(N ia),

where cr(N ia) denotes the number of points of color cr in cluster N ia.Hence, after log |χ| iterations when there is only one block, we have that for the clustering 

N log |χ| = Ffpt in each cluster Fa ∈ F fpt , the number of points of each color is equal. Let us now describe the algorithm fairpower-of-two which maintains the above invariant. To describe the algorithm first we need to define some notations. 

• As described previously the clustering C changes at each iteration i of the algorithm 

fairpower-of-two .Let, N i = {N i

> 1

, N i

> 2

, . . . , N iz } be the clustering formed at iteration i.Specifically, the clustering C goes through the following transformations. 

C → N 1 → N 2 → · · · → N log |χ| = Ffpt .

• Bij (N ia): For any cluster N ia ∈ N i, we have Bij (N ia) denotes the set of points present in N ia

having color in the block Bij .More Specifically, 

Bij (N ia) = {v ∈ N ia | σ(v) ∈ Bij }

• Let T ja denote the surplus between Bij and Bij+1 within cluster N ia. If |Bij (N ia)| ≥ | Bij+1 (N ia)|,then the surplus is a subset of Bij (N ia) of size |Bij (N ia)| − | Bij+1 (N ia)| such that all colors 

cm, c ℓ ∈ Bij satisfy cm(T ja ) = cℓ(T ja ) for all cm̸ = cℓ. Otherwise, the surplus is defined analogously from Bij+1 (N ia).Now we are ready to describe the algorithm fairpower-of-two 

Description of fairpower-of-two : The algorithm proceeds in log |χ| iterative phases to enforce fairness across pairs of buckets. The high-level structure of the algorithm is as follows: 1. Initialization: Set the initial clustering N 0 = {N 01 , N 02 , . . . , N 0 

> f

} = C (input of 

fairpower-of-two ). 2. Iterative Refinement: For each phase i = 1 to log |χ|:(a) Initialize N i as a copy of N i−1.(b) Iterate over j = 1 to |χ|/2i in steps of 2i:i. For each cluster N ia ∈ N i:99 • Compute the surplus between the bucketed subsets Bij (N ia) and Bij+1 (N ia)i, de-fined as T ja .

• Remove this surplus from N ia.

• Store the removed surplus in set Sj if |Bij (N ia)| ≥ | Bj+1 (N ia)i|, else store it in 

Sj+1 .ii. Merge the stored surpluses using the subroutine multi-GM (Sj , S j+1 ) to form new fair clusters. iii. Add the resulting clusters of the multi-GM step back to N i.3. Output: Return the final fair clustering N log |χ|.

Remarks. The algorithm ensures local fairness between adjacent buckets Bij and Bij+1 by removing and redistributing surplus elements. As the phases progress, the granularity of this bal-ancing increases, resulting in a globally fair clustering. The multi-GM subroutine plays a key role in recombining the surplus elements in a way that preserves fairness across buckets. Let us now describe the multi-gm algorithm. 

Cescription of multi-gm : multi-gm is a procedure that takes as input two collections of point sets: 

• Set1 : a set of point subsets whose elements have colors from a color block Bij ,

• Set2 : a set of point subsets whose elements have colors from the adjacent color block Bij+1 .Each block Bij and Bij+1 contains the same number of colors. The goal is to iteratively pair subsets from Set1 and Set2 to form new subsets that are locally fair, meaning each resulting subset has an equal number of points from each color in the union of Bij ∪ Bij+1 . These fair subsets are returned as a new collection. The algorithm proceeds greedily by: 

• Iteratively selecting one subset from each of Set1 and Set2 .

• Comparing their sizes and extracting a balanced subset from the larger set to match the size of the smaller one. 

• Merging the two into a fair subset and adding it to the output collection. 

• Updating or removing the subsets used and repeating this process until no more valid pairings are possible. The final output is a collection of fair subsets, each containing an equal number of points of every color from Bij ∪ Bij+1 . We provide the pseudocode of the algorithms fairpower-of-two and 

multi-gm in Algorithm 8 and Algorithm 9 respectively. 100 4.1.2 Approximation Guarantee of fairpower-of-two 

In this section, we analyze the algorithm fairpower-of-two by establishing Lemma 4.1.1 stated below, 

Lemma 4.1.1. Given a clustering C as input, the algorithm fairpower-of-two computes a 

O(|χ|1.6)-close fair clustering, where |χ| is a power of 2.Proof. To prove this lemma, we need to define the following term 

• ith fairness constraint of algorithm fairpower-of-two : A clustering D is said to satisfy the 

ith fairness constraint of algorithm fairpower-of-two if, for every cluster D ∈ D and for all pairs of distinct colors ck̸ = cℓ in the set Bij , the number of points of color ck in D equals the number of points of color cℓ in D; that is, 

ck(D) = cℓ(D).

Now we prove the following claim 

Claim 4.1.2. In the algorithm fairpower-of-two , the clustering N i is 2-close clustering to N i−1

that satisfies the ith fairness constraint of fairpower-of-two , where N 0 = C.

We will prove Claim 4.1.2 later. First, let us prove Lemma 4.1.1 assuming Claim 4.1.2. To prove Lemma 4.1.1, we need to prove N log |χ|, the output of the algorithm fairpower-of-two 

is O(|χ|1.6)-close to C. Let, N ∗ be the closest fair clustering to C.We will prove using mathematical induction that after any iteration i of the algorithm 

fairpower-of-two we have 

dist( C, N i) ≤ (3 i − 1)dist( C, N ∗) (4.1) For the base case, that is when i = 1 by Claim 4.1.2 we have N 1 is a 2-close clustering to C that satisfies the 1st fairness constraint of algorithm fairpower-of-two . Since N ∗ also satisfies the 1st fairness constraint we have 

dist( C, N 1) ≤ 2dist( C, N ∗)

Now, let us assume Eq. (4.1) is true for i = k − 1, that is 

dist( C, N k−1) ≤ (3 k−1 − 1)dist( C, N ∗)

Now, we prove it for i = k.

dist( N k−1, N k) ≤ 2dist( N k−1, N ∗) (4.2) 

≤ 2(dist( N k−1, C) + dist( C, N ∗)) 

(triangle inequality) 

≤ 2((3 k−1 − 1)dist( C, N ∗) + dist( C, N ∗)) 

(by IH) 

= 2 · 3k−1dist( C, N ∗) (4.3) 101 Here, Eq. (4.2) is true because N ∗ also satisfies the ith fairness constraint of the algorithm 

fairpower-of-two and due to Claim 4.1.2. Now, we have 

dist( C, N k) ≤ dist( C, N k−1) + dist( N k−1, N k)

(triangle inequality) 

≤ (3 k−1 − 1)dist( C, N ∗) + 2 · 3k−1dist( C, N ∗)

(by IH and Eq. (4.3)) 

= (3 k − 1)dist( C, N ∗) (4.4) Hence, now we can conclude for i = log |χ|,

dist( C, N log |χ|) ≤ (3 log |χ| − 1)dist( C, N ∗)= O(|χ|1.6)dist( C, N ∗) (log 2 3 = 1 .6) (4.5) Thus the algorithm fairpower-of-two computes a O(χ1.6)-close fair clustering which completes the proof of Lemma 4.1.1. Now, let us prove Claim 4.1.2. To prove Claim 4.1.2, we establish two intermediate claims: Claim 4.1.3 and Claim 4.1.6. Let N i∗

denote the closest clustering to N i−1 that satisfies the ith fairness constraint of algorithm 

fairpower-of-two .In Claim 4.1.3, we derive a lower bound on the distance dist( N i−1, N i∗

), and in Claim 4.1.6, we provide an upper bound on the distance dist( N i−1, N i), where N i is the clustering obtained after the ith iteration of algorithm fairpower-of-two , starting from the initial clustering C.By comparing the bounds from Claim 4.1.3 and Claim 4.1.6, we will complete the proof of Claim 4.1.2. To formalize Claim 4.1.3, lets recall and introduce some notations: 

• Recall, Bi−1 

> k

(N i−1 

> a

) denotes the set of data points in the cluster N i−1 

> a

∈ N i−1 whose colors belong to the block Bi−1 

> k

.

• Recall, T ka denotes the surplus between Bi−12k−1 and Bi−12k in cluster N i−1 

> a

. Specifically, 

– If |Bi−12k−1(N i−1 

> a

)| ≥ | Bi

> 2k

(N i−1 

> a

)|, then 

T ka ⊆ Bi−12k−1(N i−1 

> a

), |T ka | = |Bi−12k−1(N i−1 

> a

)| − | Bi−12k (N i−1 

> a

)|,

such that ∀cj̸ = cℓ ∈ Bi−12k , we have cj (T ka ) = cℓ(T ka ).

– Otherwise, 

T ka ⊆ Bi−1

> j+1

(N i−1 

> a

), |T ka | = |Bi−1

> j+1

(N i−1 

> a

)| − | Bi−1 

> j

(N i−1 

> a

)|,

such that ∀ck̸ = cℓ ∈ Bi−1

> j+1

, we have ck(T ka ) = cℓ(T ka ).

• Let, Ta denotes the union of the surpluses within the cluster N i−1 

> a

, computed across all paired color blocks (Bi−12k−1, B i−12k ) at iteration i − 1. More specifically, 

Ta =

> |χ|/2i

[

> k=1

T ka

102 Claim 4.1.3. 

dist( N i−1, N i∗

) ≥ 12

X   

> Ni−1
> a∈N i−1

|Ta| ·   N i−1 

> a

− | Ta| + |Ta|2

Proof. Consider a cluster N i−1 

> a

∈ N i−1. Suppose in N i∗

the cluster N i−1 

> a

is partitioned into 

X1, X 2, . . . , X t, more specifically, 

• For all j ∈ [t], Xj ⊆ N i∗ 

> rj

for some N i∗ 

> rj

∈ N i∗

.

• For all j̸ = ℓ ∈ [t], we have N i∗

> rj

̸ = N i∗ 

> rℓ

.

• S 

> j∈[t]

Xj = N i−1 

> a

.By abuse of notation, let us define Bi−12k−1(Xj ) and Bi−12k (Xj ) be the set of points in Xj that has a color from the blocks Bi−12k−1 and Bi−12k respectively. WLOG assume, |Bi−12k−1(N i−1 

> a

)| > |Bi−12k (N i−1 

> a

)|.Recall, the blocks are created in such a way that for two consecutive blocks Bi−12k−1 and Bi−12k , we have 

|Bi−12k−1| = |Bi−12k |.

Let’s create arbitrary pairing of colors (c, ˆc) where c ∈ Bi−12k−1 and ˆc ∈ Bi−12k , we call ˆc ∈ Bi−12k acolor corresponding to c ∈ Bi−12k−1.

• Surplus between two colors c ∈ Bi−12k−1 and ˆc ∈ Bi−12k−1 in a cluster N i−1 

> a

is defined as 

sa(c, ˆc) ⊆ Bi−12k−1(N i−1 

> a

)

of size max(0 , c (N i−1 

> a

) − ˆc(N i−1 

> a

)) 

• Surplus between two colors c ∈ Bi−12k−1 and ˆc ∈ Bi−12k for a partition Xj is defined as 

σjc ⊆ Bi−12k−1(Xj )

of size max(0 , c (Xj ) − ˆc(Xj )) It is straightforward to see that 

> t

X

> j=1

|σjc | ≥ | sa(c, ˆc)|

Let, us assume y ∈ [t] be an index such that 

> y−1

X

> j=1

|σjc | < |sa(c, ˆc)| ≤ 

> y

X

> j=1

|σjc |

Again assume, ˆσyc ⊆ σyc

103 such that, 

> y−1

X

> j=1

|σjc | + | ˆσyc | = |sa(c, ˆc)|

Let us now redefine the notation σjc for j ∈ [t]

σjc := 



σjc if j < y, 

ˆσyc if j = y, 

∅ if j > y. 

That is, the sets σjc from j = 1 to (y − 1) remains unchanged. We shrink the set σyc to include only as many elements as needed to make the summation |sa(c, ˆc)|. We ignore the sets σjc

from j = ( y + 1) to t completely. 

• Surplus with respect to consecutive pair of blocks Bi−12k−1 and Bi−12k for a partition 

Xj is defined as 

Skj = [

> c∈Bi−12k−1

σjc

• Surplus with respect to a partition Xj is defined as 

Sj =

> mi−1

[

> k=1

Skj

where mi−1 is the number of blocks created at iteration (i − 1) .It is straightforward to see that tX

> j=1

|Sj | = Ta

Now, since N i∗

satisfies ith fairness constraint of fairpower-of-two , hence in N i∗ 

> rj

∈ N i∗

we have, 

Bi−12k−1(N i∗ 

> rj

) = Bi−12k (N i∗ 

> rj

).

Recall, Xj ⊆ N i∗ 

> rj

, hence there must exist at least |Skj | vertices having colors from the color block 

Bi−12k in N i∗ 

> rj

that belongs to clusters other than N i−1 

> a

. Let us denote this set of vertices by M kj .More specifically, 

• M kj ⊆ N i∗ 

> rj

such that following conditions are satisfied. 1. M kj ∩ N i−1 

> a

= ∅.2. |M kj | = |Skj |.3. The vertices in M kj have colors from the color block Bi−12k .104 Let, 

Mj =

> mi−1

[

> k=1

M kj

Note, since |M kj | = |Skj | we also have |Mj | = |Sj |.Let us also define 

M (N i−1 

> a

) = 

> t

[

> j=1

Mj

By the definition of dist( N i−1, N i∗

) is the number of pairs (u, v ) that are separated in N i−1

and together in N i∗

or viceversa. Formally, we say that (u, v ) are together in N i∗

if there exists 

N i∗ 

> k

∈ N i∗

such that u, v ∈ N i∗ 

> k

and we say (u, v ) are separated in N i∗

if there exists N i∗ 

> k

, N i∗ 

> j

∈ N i∗

such that k̸ = j, u ∈ N i∗ 

> k

and v ∈ N i∗

> j

Now, to lower bound dist( N i−1, N i∗

) let us define some costs. 

• exp 1(N i−1 

> a

) : For a cluster N i−1 

> a

∈ N i−1, exp 1(N i−1 

> a

) denotes the number of pairs (u, v ) such that (a) u ∈ (N i−1 

> a

\ Ta) and v ∈ Ta but separated in N i∗

or, (b) u ∈ (N i−1 

> a

\ Ta and v ∈ M (N i−1 

> a

).

• exp 2(N i−1 

> a

) : For a cluster N i−1 

> a

∈ N i−1, exp 2(N i−1 

> a

) denotes the number of pairs (u, v ) such that (a) u, v ∈ Ta but separated in N i∗

or, (b) u ∈ Ta and v ∈ M (N i−1 

> a

).We can verify that the pairs counted in exp 1(N i−1 

> a

, k ), and exp 2(N i−1 

> a

, k ) are disjoint and thus we have. 

dist( N i−1, N i∗

) ≥ X   

> Ni−1
> a∈N i−1

12 exp 1(N i−1 

> a

)+ 12 exp 2(N i−1 

> a

) (4.6) We multiply exp 1(N i−1 

> a

) and exp 2(N i−1 

> a

) with 1/2 to avoid overcounting of pairs. In both the costs we count the pairs (u, v ) in N i−1 

> a

and M (N i−1 

> a

). This pair (u, v ) may be counted twice because we take summation overall N i−1 

> a

∈ N i−1.Now, to prove Claim 4.1.3, we prove the following 1. exp 1(N i−1 

> a

) ≥ | Ta|   N i−1 

> a

− | Ta|.2. exp 2(N i−1 

> a

) ≥ | Ta|2.It is easy to see that combining Eq. (4.6) and the above statements will prove this Claim 4.1.3. So, let us now prove the above statements. 105 Claim 4.1.4. exp 1(N i−1 

> a

) ≥ | Ta|   N i−1 

> a

− | Ta|

Proof. Recall in N i∗

, the cluster N i−1 

> a

is partitioned into X1, . . . , X t.Now, consider a partition Xj of N i−1 

> a

where j ∈ [t]. Let us count the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Xj \ Sj and v ∈ Sℓ for ℓ̸ = j. The number of such pairs is 

|Xj \ Sj | X

> ℓ̸=j

|Sℓ| (4.7) Let us also count the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Xj \ Sj and v ∈ Mj . The number of such pairs is 

|Xj \ Sj || Mj |

=|Xj \ Sj || Sj | (4.8) Now, combining Eq. (4.7) and Eq. (4.8) we get the number of pairs (u, v ) such that, 

(u, v ) ∈ Xj \ Sj × Sℓ for ℓ̸ = j

or 

(u, v ) ∈ Xj \ Sj × Mj

is 

|Xj \ Sj | X

> ℓ̸=j

|Sℓ|

+|Xj \ Sj || Sℓ|

= |Xj \ Sj | | Ta| (4.9) Now from Eq. (4.9) we get, 

exp 1(N i−1 

> a

, k ) ≥

> t

X

> j=1

|Xj \ Sj | | Ta|

= |Ta|

> t

X

> j=1

|Xj \ Sj |

= |Ta|   N i−1 

> a

− | Ta|

Claim 4.1.5. exp 2(N i−1 

> a

) ≥ | Ta|2

106 Proof. Consider a partition Xj of N i−1 

> a

where j ∈ [t]. Let us count the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Sj and v ∈ Sℓ for ℓ̸ = j. The number of such pairs is 

|Sj | X

> ℓ̸=j

|Sℓ| (4.10) Let us also count the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ Sj and v ∈ Mj . The number of such pairs is 

|Sj || Mj |

=|Sj || Sj | (4.11) Now, combining Eq. (4.10) and Eq. (4.11) we get the number of pairs (u, v ) such that, 

(u, v ) ∈ Sj × Sℓ for ℓ̸ = j

or 

(u, v ) ∈ Sj × Mj

is 

|Sj | X

> ℓ̸=j

|Sℓ| + |Sj || Sj |

= |Sj | | Ta| (4.12) Now from Eq. (4.12) we get, 

exp 2(N i−1 

> a

) ≥

> t

X

> j=1

|Sj | | Ta|

= |Ta|

> t

X

> j=1

|Sj |

= |Ta| | Ta|

= |Ta|2

Claim 4.1.6. 

dist( N i−1, N i) ≤ X   

> Ni−1
> a∈N i−1

|Ta|   N i−1 

> a

− | Ta|

+ 12 |Ta|2

107 Proof. In the algorithm fairpower-of-two , from each cluster N i−1 

> a

∈ N i−1 we cut the set Ta.Hence, the pairs (u, v ) s.t. u ∈ N i−1 

> a

\ Ta and v ∈ Ta are counted in dist( N i−1, N i).The number of such pairs is 

|Ta|   N i−1 

> a

− | Ta| (4.13) Again in Algorithm 9 the set Ta can further get splitted into multiple subsets R1, R 2, . . . , R t

(say). Each of these sets Ri for i ∈ [t] gets merged with |Ri| points from a different cluster. Hence, the following pairs (u, v ) are counted in dist( N i−1, N i) which satisfies 1. u ∈ Ri and v belongs to the set that merged to Ri.2. u ∈ Ri and v ∈ Rj for i̸ = j.To count such pairs (u, v ) we use a charging scheme, we charge 1/2 for the vertex u and 1/2 for the vertex v. That is we define for a set Ri.

pay( Ri) = 12 |{ (u, v ) |u ∈ Ri and v ∈ the set merged to Ri

or u ∈ Ri and v ∈ Rj for i̸ = j}| 

The total number of such pairs is 

> t

X

> i=1

pay( Ri) = 

> t

X

> i=1

12 |Ri|2 + 12 |Ri|| (Ta \ Ri)|

= 12 |Ta|

> t

X

> i=1

|Ri|

= 12 |Ta|2 (4.14) By Eq. (4.13) and Eq. (4.14) we get 

dist( N i−1, N i) ≤ X   

> Ni−1
> a∈N i−1

|Ta|   N i−1 

> a

− | Ta|

+ 12 |Ta|2

It is straightforward to see that Claim 4.1.3 and Claim 4.1.6 proves Claim 4.1.2. Lemma 4.1.1 proves Theorem 6 when |χ| is a power of 2. Now, we prove Theorem 6 for any values of |χ|. To do that, we need to describe the algorithm fair-equi .108 4.1.3 Details of Algorithm: General Case 

To describe the algorithm fair-equi we need to use a subroutine make-pdc-fair . In the subroutine 

make-pdc-fair , we are given a clustering I = {I1, I 2, . . . , I η} over a point set V . Each point v ∈ V

is assigned a color from a finite set ζ = {z1, z 2, . . . , z r}. The total number of points of each color satisfies the global proportion: 

z1(V ) : z2(V ) : . . . : zr(V ) = p1 : p2 : . . . : pr

WLOG assume p1 > p 2 > · · · > p r.Furthermore, for each cluster Ii ∈ I , the number of points of each color zj is a multiple of pj .Recall from Chapter 3 such a clustering I is called p-divisible clustering (pdc for short). The goal of make-pdc-fair is to construct a clustering Fmpf such that for each cluster F ∈ F mpf ,

z1(F ) : z2(F ) : . . . : zr(F ) = p1 : p2 : . . . : pr

Description of the subroutine make-pdc-fair : The algorithm proceeds in ⌈log 2 r⌉ iterations. At each iteration, we refine the current clustering to more closely satisfy the target color proportions. Let F0 := I denote the initial clustering. The algorithm maintains a sequence of progressively refined clusterings: 

I = F0 → F 1 → F 2 → . . . → F ⌈log 2 r⌉ = Fmpf 

In each iteration t, the algorithm enforces proportionality over small blocks of colors, where the block size increases with t. As the iterations progress, these local balancing constraints compound, eventually ensuring that the final clustering F satisfies the full global ratio p1 : p2 : · · · : pr within every cluster. 

Description of the color blocks: We define a hierarchical merging of the color set ζ =

{z1, z 2, . . . , z r} over ⌈log 2 r⌉ iterations. At each iteration t, we maintain a partition of ζ into blocks 

{Bt

> 1

, B t

> 2

, . . . , B tmt }, where each block represents a group of colors whose proportions will be jointly enforced in that round. 

• Iteration 0: Initialize each color into its own singleton block: 

B0 

> j

= {zj } for j = 1 , 2, . . . , r 

• Iteration t ≥ 1: Merge adjacent blocks from the previous iteration: 

Bti = Bt−12i−1 ∪ Bt−12i for i = 1 , 2, . . . , 

j mt−1

2

k

If mt−1 is odd, then let Bt 

> ⌈mt−1/2⌉

= Bt−1 

> mt−1

(unchanged) 

• Continue this process until the final iteration T = ⌈log 2 r⌉, where a single block B⌈log 2 r⌉ 

> 1

= ζ

is formed. At each level t, we enforce the proportionality constraints jointly over the colors in each block 

Bti for all clusters in the current clustering Ft−1. This recursive construction guarantees that after 

⌈log 2 r⌉ rounds, the final clustering F⌈log 2 r⌉ satisfies the global target ratio p1 : p2 : · · · : pr in every cluster. 109 Balancing Rule: Consider a block Bti at iteration t, defined as: 

Bti = Bt−12i−1 ∪ Bt−12i

Let 

Bt−12i−1 = {za1 , z a2 , . . . , z as }, Bt−12i = {zb1 , z b2 , . . . , z bu }

where s ≥ u.By construction, at iteration t − 1, each cluster F t−1 ∈ F t−1 satisfies: 

za1 (F t−1) : . . . : zas (F t−1) = pa1 : . . . : pas

and 

zb1 (F t−1) : . . . : zbu (F t−1) = pb1 : . . . : pbu

Suppose the point counts in F t−1 satisfy: 

zaj (F t−1) = paj · x for j ∈ [s]

and 

zbk (F t−1) = pbk · y

for k ∈ [u].Our goal is to construct a cluster F t ∈ F t such that: 

za1 (F t) : . . . : zas (F t) : zb1 (F t) : . . . : zbu (F t)= pa1 : . . . : pas : pb1 : . . . : pbu

To achieve this, 

• If x > y , merge pbk · (x − y) points of color zbk into F t−1 for each k ∈ [u].

• If x < y , cut pbk · (y − x) points of color zbk from F t−1 for each k ∈ [u].This ensures that the scaling factor for both sub-blocks becomes equal ( x in both the cases), aligning the entire block Bti to the correct global ratio structure. We provide the pseudocode of 

make-pdc-fair in Algorithm 10. Let us now describe the algorithm fair-equi . The algorithm fair-equi takes a clustering C

as input. Each vertex of the clustering is colored from the colors χ = {c1, c 2, . . . , c d} where |χ| is not a power of two. 

Description of the algorithm fair-equi : We divide χ into log |χ| many disjoint color groups 

G1, G 2, . . . , G log |χ| such that the size of each group, |Gj | where j ∈ [log |χ|] is a power of two. We do it greedily according to the binary representation of |χ|. Consider the binary representation of 

|χ|. For each index j ∈ [log ⌈| χ|⌉ ], if the corresponding bit is 1, create a group of size 2j−1.We apply the algorithm fairpower-of-two to get an intermediate clustering I = {I1, . . . , I η}

such that for each cluster Ij ∈ I where j ∈ [k] we have for any pair of colors ca, c b ∈ Gℓ where 

ℓ ∈ [log |χ|],110 ca(Ij ) = cb(Ij )

For a subset S ⊆ V , let us define Gℓ(S) as the set of vertices v ∈ S such that v has a color in 

Gℓ. Now, our goal is to get a clustering F = {F1, . . . , F ι} from C such that for each cluster Fk ∈ F 

we have cu(Fk) = cv(Fk) where cu, c v ∈ χ.Given the intermediate clustering I as input, the algorithm make-pdc-fair produces a final fair clustering F = {F1, . . . , F ι} and thus for each cluster Fj ∈ F , the following proportion holds. 

|G1(Fj )| : |G2(Fj )| : . . . : |Glog |χ|(Fj )|

= |G1| : |G2| : . . . : |Glog |χ||

To apply make-pdc-fair , we consider a group of colors Gℓ as a single metacolor zℓ. Here the clustering I is a p-divisible clustering because for any cluster Ij ∈ I we have |Gℓ(Ij )| is divisible by 

|Gℓ|.Furthermore, the algorithm make-pdc-fair ensures uniformity within each group: for every group Gℓ and for any pair of colors ca, c b ∈ Gℓ with ℓ ∈ [log |χ|], it guarantees that ca(Fj ) = cb(Fj ).As a consequence, for any pair of colors cu, c v ∈ χ, we have cu(Fj ) = cv(Fj ), i.e., each color is equally represented within every cluster of F.

4.1.4 Approximation Guarantee of fair-equi 

To analyse fair-equi , we first analyze the subroutine make-pdc-fair for which we prove the following lemma. 

Lemma 4.1.7. The algorithm make-pdc-fair outputs a clustering F that is O(r2.81 )-close fair clustering to the input clustering I, where r is the number of colors. Proof. To prove this lemma, let us define the tth fairness constraint of make-pdc-fair algorithm. 

• tth fairness constraint of make-pdc-fair : Let C be a clustering and let {Btk} denote the color blocks at the tth iteration in the make-pdc-fair algorithm. We say that C satisfies the tth Fairness Constraint of make-pdc-fair if, for every cluster Ci ∈ C and every block Btk, the color counts satisfy: 

za1 (Ci) : za2 (Ci) : · · · : zam (Ci) = pa1 : pa2 : · · · : pam

where Btk = {za1 , . . . , z am }

To prove Lemma 4.1.7, we need to prove the following claim 

Claim 4.1.8. For all iterations t of the algorithm make-pdc-fair , Ft is a 6-close clustering to 

Ft−1 that satisfies the tth fairness constraint of make-pdc-fair . More specifically, 

dist( Ft−1, Ft) ≤ 6dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

)

where Ft∗

is the closest clustering to Ft−1 that satisfies tth fairness constraint of make-pdc-fair .

For now, let us assume Claim 4.1.8 and prove Lemma 4.1.7. 111 Proof of Lemma 4.1.7: To prove Lemma 4.1.7, we need to prove Flog r, the output of the algorithm make-pdc-fair is r2.8-close to I. Let F∗ be the closest fair clustering to I.We will prove using mathematical induction that after any iteration t of the algorithm 

make-pdc-fair we have 

dist( I, Ft) ≤ (7 t − 1)dist( I, F∗) (4.15) For the base case, that is when t = 1 by Claim 4.1.8 we have F1 is a 6-close clustering to I

that satisfies the 1st fairness constraint of algorithm make-pdc-fair . Since F∗ also satisfies the 1st fairness constraint we have 

dist( D, F1) ≤ 6dist( D, F∗)

Now, let us assume Eq. (4.15) is true for t = k − 1, that is 

dist( I, Fk−1) ≤ (7 k−1 − 1)dist( I, F∗)

Now, we prove it for t = k.

dist( Fk−1, Fk) ≤ 6dist( Fk−1, F∗) (4.16) 

≤ 6(dist( Fk−1, I) + dist( I, F∗)) (by triangle inequality )

≤ 6 · (7 k−1 − 1)dist( I, F∗) + 6dist( I, F∗)(by inductive hypothesis )= 6 · 7k−1dist( I, F∗) (4.17) Here, Eq. (4.16) is true because F∗ also satisfies the kth fairness constraint of the algorithm 

make-pdc-fair and due to Claim 4.1.8. Now, we have 

dist( I, Fk) ≤ dist( I, Fk−1) + dist( Fk−1, Fk)(by triangle inequality )

≤ (7 k−1 − 1)dist( I, F∗) + 6 · 7k−1dist( I, F∗)(by inductive hypothesis and Eq. (4.17) )= (7 k − 1)dist( I, F∗) (4.18) Hence, now we can conclude for t = log r,

dist( I, Flog r) ≤ O(7 log r)dist( I, F∗)= O(r2.8)dist( I, F∗) ( as log 2 7 = 2 .8) (4.19) Thus the algorithm make-pdc-fair computes a O(r2.8)-close fair clustering which completes the proof of Lemma 4.1.7. Now, let us prove Claim 4.1.8. To prove Claim 4.1.8, we establish four intermediate claims: Claim 4.1.9, Claim 4.1.10, Claim 4.1.11 and Claim 4.1.12. 112 Let Ft∗

denote the closest clustering to Ft−1 that satisfies the tth fairness constraint of algorithm 

make-pdc-fair .In Claim 4.1.9, Claim 4.1.10 and Claim 4.1.11 we derive lower bounds on the distance 

dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

), and in Claim 4.1.12, we provide an upper bound on the distance dist( Ft−1, Ft),where Ft is the clustering obtained after the tth iteration of algorithm make-pdc-fair , starting from the initial clustering I.By comparing the bounds from Claim 4.1.9, Claim 4.1.10, Claim 4.1.11 and Claim 4.1.12, we will complete the proof of Claim 4.1.8. To state Claim 4.1.9, we define the surplus and deficit for a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1.Recall Ft−1 denote the clustering obtained after the (t − 1) th iteration of the make-pdc-fair 

algorithm and {Bt−11 , B t−12 , . . . , B t−1 

> mt−1

} be the set of color blocks at this iteration. For a color 

cu ∈ χ, recall, pu denote its proportion in the vertex set V , i.e., 

c1(V ) : c2(V ) : · · · : c|χ|(V ) = p1 : p2 : · · · : p|χ|.

WLOG, we assume p1 > p 2 > · · · > p |χ|. Note that due to this assumption for two colors 

cu ∈ Bt−1 

> j

and cv ∈ Bt−1 

> k

where k > j we have pv < p u.We define the following for a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1:Recall the color blocks Bt−12k−1 and Bt−12k are created in such a way that we have |Bt−12k−1| ≥ | Bt−12k |.Suppose ˜Bt−12k−1 ⊆ Bt−12k−1 such that | ˜Bt−12k−1| = |Bt−12k |.We create an arbitrary pair of colors (cj , c ˆj ) where cj ∈ ˜Bt−12k−1 and cˆj ∈ Bt−12k . We say cˆj ∈ Bt−12k

is a color corresponding to cj ∈ Bt−12k−1. Note for the colors present in Bt−12k−1 \ ˜Bt−12k−1 we have no corresponding color. Now we define the following terms 

• Weight of a vertex v: For v ∈ V , suppose it has a color cj ∈ Bt−12k−1 and its corresponding color cˆj ∈ Bt−12k .In this case, since pj > p ˆj we define 

w(v) = pˆj

pj

otherwise if v has color cˆj ∈ Bt−12k and its corresponding color cj ∈ Bt−12k−1 then we define 

w(v) = 1 

Note, w(v) ≤ 1 for all v ∈ V .

• Surplus w.r.t. two corresponding colors cj and cˆj in a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 is defined as 

sa(cj , c ˆj ) = max(0 , c ˆj (F t−1 

> a

) − pˆj

pj

cj (F t−1 

> a

)) 

• Surplus w.r.t. consecutive blocks Bi−12k−1 and Bi−12k in a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 is defined as 

T ka = X 

> cj∈Bi−12k−1

sa(cj , c ˆj )

113 • Surplus of a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 is defined as 

Ta =

> mt−1

X

> k=1

T ka

where mt−1 is the number of blocks at iteration (t − 1) .

• deficit w.r.t. two corresponding colors cj and cˆj in a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 is defined as 

da(cj , c ˆj ) = max(0 , pˆj

pj

cj (F t−1 

> a

) − cˆj (F t−1 

> a

)) 

• deficit w.r.t. consecutive blocks Bi−12k−1 and Bi−12k in a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 is defined as 

Dka = X 

> cj∈Bi−12k−1

da(cj , c ˆj )

• deficit of a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 is defined as 

Da =

> mt−1

X

> k=1

Dka

Now, we can state Claim 4.1.9. 

Claim 4.1.9. 

dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) ≥ 14

X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

Ta

  F t−1 

> a

− Ta



+ Da

  F t−1 

> a

− Ta



Proof. Consider a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1. Suppose in Ft∗

the cluster F t−1 

> a

is partitioned into 

X1, X 2, . . . , X s, more specifically, 

• For all j ∈ [t], Xj ⊆ F t∗ 

> rj

for some F t∗ 

> rj

∈ F t∗

.

• For all j̸ = ℓ ∈ [t], we have F t∗

> rj

̸ = F t∗ 

> rℓ

.

• S 

> j∈[s]

Xj = F t−1 

> a

.According to the definition of dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

), in dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) we count the number of pairs 

(u, v ) that are present in different clusters in the clustering Ft−1 but in the same cluster in the clustering Ft∗

or present in the same cluster in the clustering Ft−1 but present in different clusters in the clustering Ft∗

.To give a lower bound on dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) we calculate the cost incurred by each cluster F t−1 

> a

∈Ft−1. Let us describe this formally, 

pay( F t−1 

> a

) = |{ (u, v ) | (u, v ∈ F t−1 

> a

∧ u ≁Ft∗ v)

114 ∨ (u ∈ F t−1 

> a

, v / ∈ F t−1 

> a

∧ u ∼Ft∗ v)}| 

where u ∼Ft∗ v denotes u and v belongs to the same cluster in the clustering Ft∗

.It is straightforward to see that 

dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) ≥ 12

X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

pay( F t−1 

> a

) (4.20) In the above expression, we multiply by 1/2 because we took summation overall F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1.To count a pair (u, v ) where u ∈ F t−1 

> a

and v ∈ F t−1 

> b

for a̸ = b we charge 1/2 when calculating 

pay( F t−1 

> a

) and again 1/2 when calculating pay( F t−1 

> b

).Now, we provide a lower bound on pay( F t−1 

> a

). To provide this lower bound, we need to define some terms. 

• Weight of a color block: 

w(Bt−1 

> j

) = X

> cu∈Bt−1
> j

pu.

• Scaling factor of a color block in cluster F t−1 

> a

:

h(Bt−1 

> j

) = cu(F t−1 

> a

)

pu

for any cu ∈ Bt−1 

> j

,

which is well-defined since 

cv(F t−1 

> a

)

pv

= cu(F t−1 

> a

)

pu

∀cu̸ = cv ∈ Bt−1 

> j

.

Create two sets CB and MB .

CB = {(Bt−1 

> i

, B t−1 

> i+1

) | h(Bt−1 

> i+1

) > h (Bt−1 

> i

)}

MB = {(Bt−1 

> i

, B t−1 

> i+1

) | h(Bt−1 

> i+1

) ≤ h(Bt−1 

> i

)}

Informally, the set CB contains a pair of color blocks Bt−1 

> i

and Bt+1  

> i+1

if the scaling factor of Bt+1 

> i+1

is greater than the scaling factor of Bt+1  

> i

. In the algorithm make-pdc-fair , we cut the surplus for these types of pairs of color blocks. For the pair of color blocks in MB we merge the deficit. Now, for the pairs of color blocks (Bt+1  

> i

, B t+1  

> i+1

) ∈ CB let us define some notations w.r.t. apartition Xj .

• Surplus w.r.t. two corresponding colors cj and cˆj in a partition Xℓ is defined as 

σℓcj = cˆj (Xℓ) − pˆj

pj

cj (Xℓ)

Here, (cj , c ˆj ) ∈ Bt−12k−1 × Bt−12k where (Bt−12k−1, B t−12k ) ∈ CB .115 It is straightforward to see that, 

sa(cj , c ˆj ) ≥

> s

X

> ℓ=1

σℓcj

Similar to the proof of Lemma 4.1.1 we can redefine σℓcj in such a way that 

sa(cj , c ˆj ) = 

> s

X

> ℓ=1

σℓcj

• Surplus w.r.t. two consecutive blocks Bi−12k−1 and Bi−12k in a partition Xℓ is defined as 

Skℓ = X 

> cj∈Bt−12k−1

σℓcj

• Surplus of the partition Xℓ is 

Sℓ = X

> Bt−12k−1∈CB

Skℓ

It is straightforward to see that 

Ta =

> s

X

> ℓ=1

Sℓ.

Since, Ft∗

satisfies the tth fairness constraint of the algorithm make-pdc-fair we have for a cluster 

F t∗ 

> rℓ

∈ F t∗

cu(F t∗ 

> rℓ

)

pu

= cv(F t∗ 

> rℓ

)

pv

∀cu ∈ Bt−12k−1, c v ∈ Bt−12k

recall Xℓ ⊆ F t∗ 

> rℓ

∈ F t∗

.Let, Mℓ ⊆ F t∗ 

> rℓ

\ F t−1

> a

To maintain the tth fairness constraint of the algorithm make-pdc-fair we must have 

|Mℓ| ≥ X

> v∈Mℓ

w(v) ≥ Sℓ

Reasons behind the above inequalities 

• 1st inequality: w(v) ≤ 1.

• 2nd inequality: This follows from the requirement that the cluster F t∗ 

> rℓ

must satisfy the 

tth fairness constraint of the algorithm make-pdc-fair . That is, for every pair (cj , c ˆj ) ∈

Bt−12k−1 × Bt−12k , we must ensure that after adding the set Mℓ to Xℓ in the cluster F t∗ 

> rℓ

, the following holds: X 

> v∈Cj(Xℓ∪Mℓ)

w(v) = X 

> v∈Cˆj(Xℓ∪Mℓ)

w(v)

where Cr(S) denotes the set of vertices of color cr in a subset S ⊆ V . In other words, the total weight of the vertices of color cj and cˆj in the updated cluster must be equal, for every such pair. The surplus Sℓ precisely captures the imbalance in these weights in Xℓ, and hence the total weight added must be at least Sℓ to restore this balance. 116 Let, us define exp 1(F t−1 

> a

) be the number of pairs (u, v ) such that 1. Either u ∈ Mℓ and v ∈ Xℓ

2. or u ∈ Xm and v ∈ Xℓ for m̸ = ℓ.Hence, 

exp 1(F t−1 

> a

)

≥ 12

> s

X

> ℓ=1

|Mℓ|(|Xℓ|) + X

> m̸=ℓ

|Xm|(|Xℓ|)



≥ 12

> s

X

> ℓ=1

Sℓ(|Xℓ| − Sℓ) + X

> m̸=ℓ

Sm(|Xℓ| − Sℓ)



≥ 12

> s

X

> ℓ=1

Ta(|Xℓ| − Sℓ)

≥ 12 Ta(|F t−1 

> a

| − Ta) (4.21) Similarly, now for a pair of color blocks (Bt−12k−1, B t+1 2k ) ∈ MB and for a partition Xℓ, let us define 

• ˆMℓ ⊆ V \ F t−1 

> a

that serves the deficit for the color blocks Bt−12k−1 and Bt−12k in the cluster F t∗ 

> rℓ

.

• Gm = S  

> (Bt−12k−1,B t−12k)∈MB

F t∗ 

> rm

∩ Bt−12k−1(F t−1 

> a

) : it denotes the part of the set Bt−12k−1(F t−1 

> a

) that lies in the cluster F t∗ 

> rm

∈ F t∗

for m̸ = ℓ

It is straightforward to see that 

| ˆMℓ| + X

> m̸=ℓ

|Gm| ≥ Da

Let, us define exp 2(F t−1 

> a

) be the number of pairs (u, v ) such that 1. Either u ∈ ˆMℓ and v ∈ Xℓ

2. or u ∈ Gm and v ∈ Xℓ for m̸ = ℓ.Hence, 

exp 2(F t−1 

> a

) ≥ 12

> s

X

> ℓ=1

| ˆMℓ|| Xℓ|

+ X

> m̸=ℓ

|Gm|| Xℓ|≥ 12

> s

X

> j=1

Da(|Xℓ| − | Sℓ|)

≥ 12 Da(|F t−1 

> a

| − Ta) (4.22) 117 Since, in exp 1(F t−1 

> a

) and exp 2(F t−1 

> a

) we count disjoint pairs. Hence, 

pay( F t−1 

> a

) ≥ exp 1(F t−1 

> a

) + exp 2(F t−1 

> a

) (4.23) Now. by Eq. (4.20), Eq. (4.21), Eq. (4.22) and Eq. (4.23) we conclude the proof of Claim 4.1.9. 

Claim 4.1.10. 

dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) ≥ X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

12 T 2

> a

Proof. Similar to the proof of the previous claim, we define Sℓ as the surplus of a partition Xℓ and 

Mℓ ⊆ V \ F t−1 

> a

be the set of points that are merged to Xℓ to satisfy the tth fairness constraint of 

make-pdc-fair .Let, us define pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ) be the number of pairs (u, v ) s.t. 

• u ∈ Mℓ, v ∈ Xℓ

• u ∈ Xm, v ∈ Xℓ for all m̸ = ℓ.Now, 

dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) ≥ 12

X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1
> s

X

> ℓ=1

pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ)

We multiply by 1/2 to avoid overcounting of pairs. Note we can overcount a pair in the following situations (i) Since we take the sum overall F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1, we can overcount a pair (u, v ) if u ∈ F t−1 

> b

and 

v ∈ F t−1 

> a

where b̸ = a when considering the cluster F t−1 

> b

in the summation. (ii) Since we take the sum over all partitions Xℓ of a cluster F t−1 

> a

, we can overcount a pair (u, v )

if u ∈ Xm and v ∈ Xℓ where m̸ = ℓ when we consider the partition Xm in the summation. Now, we only need to show sX

> ℓ=1

pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ) ≥ T 2

> as

X

> ℓ=1

pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ) ≥

> s

X

> ℓ=1

(|Mℓ|| Xℓ| + X

> m̸=ℓ

|Xm|| Xℓ|)

≥

> s

X

> ℓ=1

(|Mℓ|Sℓ + X

> m̸=ℓ

SmSℓ)

≥

> s

X

> ℓ=1

(S2 

> ℓ

+ X

> m̸=ℓ

SmSℓ)

≥ T 2

> a

118 Claim 4.1.11. 

dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) ≥ X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

12 D2

> a

Proof. For a pair of color blocks (Bt−12k−1, B t+1 2k ) ∈ MB and for a partition Xℓ, let us define 

• ˆMℓ ⊆ V \ F t−1 

> a

that serves the deficit for the color blocks Bt−12k−1 and Bt−12k in the cluster F t∗ 

> rℓ

.

• Gm = S  

> (Bt−12k−1,B t−12k)∈MB

F t∗ 

> rm

∩ Bt−12k−1(F t−1 

> a

) : it denotes the part of the set Bt−12k−1(F t−1 

> a

) that lies in the cluster F t∗ 

> rm

∈ F t∗

for m̸ = ℓ

It is straightforward to see that 

| ˆMℓ| + X

> m̸=ℓ

|Gm| ≥ Da

Let, us define pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ) be the number of pairs (u, v ) s.t. 1. Either u ∈ ˆMℓ and v ∈ Xℓ

2. or u ∈ Gm and v ∈ Xℓ for m̸ = ℓ.

dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) ≥ 12

X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1
> s

X

> ℓ=1

pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ)

We multiply by 1/2 to avoid overcounting of pairs. Note, we can overcount a pair in the following situations (i) Since we take the sum overall F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1, we can overcount a pair (u, v ) if u ∈ F t−1 

> b

and 

v ∈ F t−1 

> a

where b̸ = a when considering the cluster F t−1 

> b

in the summation. (ii) Since we take the sum over all partitions Xℓ of a cluster F t−1 

> a

, we can overcount a pair (u, v )

if u ∈ Gm and v ∈ Xℓ where m̸ = ℓ when we consider the partition Xm in the summation. Note Gm ⊆ Xm.Now, we only need to show sX

> ℓ=1

pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ) ≥ D2

> as

X

> ℓ=1

pay( F t−1 

> a

, X ℓ) ≥

> s

X

> ℓ=1

| ˆMℓ|| Xℓ| + X

> m̸=ℓ

|Gm|| Xℓ|



≥

> s

X

> ℓ=1

Da|Xℓ|≥ Da|F t−1 

> a

|≥ D2 

> a

(as |F t−1 

> a

| ≥ Da)119 Claim 4.1.12. 

dist( Ft−1, Ft) ≤ X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

Ta

  F t−1 

> a

− Ta



+ Da

  F t−1 

> a

− Da



+ 12 D2 

> a

+ 12 T 2

> a

Proof. For each cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 we cut the surplus many vertices, Ta and merge deficit many vertices Da to it. Hence, in dist( Ft−1, Ft) for a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 we count the cost of cutting and merging to it, which is 

Ta(|F t−1 

> a

| − Ta) + Da(|F t−1 

> a

| − Da)

Again for a cluster F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 the deficit many vertices that we merge can come from several other clusters. A trivial upper bound on this cost is given by (1 /2) · D2

> a

.The surplus many vertices Ta, that we cut from F t−1 

> a

∈ F t−1 can further get divided. A trivial upper bound on the cost of dividing Ta many points is (1 /2) · T 2 

> a

.Hence we get, 

dist( Ft−1, Ft) ≤ X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

Ta

  F t−1 

> a

− Ta



+ Da

  F t−1 

> a

− Da



+ 12 D2 

> a

+ 12 T 2

> a

Now we complete the proof of Claim 4.1.8. 

Proof of Claim 4.1.8 : By Claim 4.1.12 we get, 

dist( Ft−1, Ft) ≤ X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

Ta

  F t−1 

> a

− Ta



+ Da

  F t−1 

> a

− Da



+ 12 D2 

> a

+ 12 T 2 

> a

(4.24) By Claim 4.1.9 we get 

X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F t−1

Ta

  F t−1 

> a

− Ta



+ Da

  F t−1 

> a

− Da

 ≤ 4dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) (4.25) By Claim 4.1.11 we get 

X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F i−1

12 D2 

> a

≤ dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) (4.26) 120 By Claim 4.1.10 we get 

X  

> Ft−1
> a∈F i−1

12 T 2 

> a

≤ dist( Ft−1, Ft∗

) (4.27) Now, by combining Eq. (4.24), Eq. (4.25), Eq. (4.26) and Eq. (4.27) we get, 

dist( F t−1, F t) ≤ 6dist( F t−1, F t∗

)

We have shown earlier that Claim 4.1.8 implies Lemma 4.1.7. Thus, we complete the proof of Lemma 4.1.7. Using Lemma 4.1.1 and Lemma 4.1.7, we can prove Theorem 6. 

Proof of Theorem 6. To prove this theorem, we analyse the algorithm fair-equi . The algorithm 

fair-equi takes a clustering C as input, applies the algorithm fairpower-of-two as a subroutine to create an intermediate clustering I and then applies the subroutine make-pdc-fair to get the final fair clustering F.By Lemma 4.1.7 we get that, F is O(log 2.8 |χ|)-close to the clustering I. By Lemma 4.1.1 we get that I is O(|χ|1.6)-close to the clustering C. By applying the triangle inequality to the two preceding results, we conclude that the output clustering F produced by fair-equi is O(|χ|1.6 log 2.8 |χ|)-close to the input clustering C.Let F∗ be the closest fair clustering to C. Hence, we get, 

dist( C, F) ≤ dist( C, I) + dist( I, F) (triangle inequality) 

≤ dist( C, I) + O(log 2.8 |χ|)dist( I, F∗)

≤ O(|χ|1.6)dist( C, F∗) + O(log 2.8 |χ|)dist( I, F∗)

≤ O(|χ|1.6)dist( C, F∗) + O(log 2.8 |χ|)(dist( C, I)+ dist( C, F∗)) (triangle inequality) 

≤ O(|χ|1.6 log 2.8 |χ| + |χ| + log 2.8 |χ|)dist( C, F∗)

≤ O(|χ|1.6 log 2.8 |χ|)dist( C, F∗)

This completes the proof of Theorem 6. 

# 4.2 Approximate Closest Fair Clustering for Arbitrary-Proportion Groups 

In this section, we extend our analysis from the equiproportion setting to the general case where color groups may appear in arbitrary proportions. In this setting, we provide a polynomial-time algorithm to compute an approximate closest fair clustering to a given input clustering C. More specifically, we prove Theorem 7, which we restate below. 121 Theorem 7. There is a polynomial time algorithm that, given an arbitrary clustering C over a vertex set V where each vertex v ∈ V has a color in χ = {c1, . . . , c k}, finds an O(|χ|3.81 )-close fair clustering to the clustering C.

To prove the above theorem, we take a 2-step approach similar to Chapter 3, which was con-strained to only two colors. (i) First, we convert the clustering C to a clustering M such that for each cluster Mi ∈ M , cj (Mi)

is divisible by pj . Recall, we call such a clustering a p-divisible clustering. (ii) In the second step, we will provide the clustering M as input to the algorithm make-pdc-fair 

and get a fair clustering F as output. Now, let us describe the fair-general that computes an approximate closest fair clustering to a given input clustering C. We first describe a subroutine create-pdc that converts a clustering C

on a vertex set V to a p-divisible clustering M.

4.2.1 Details of the Algorithm 

To describe the algorithm create-pdc , let us define some terms. 

• σ(Ck, c j ): Surplus of Ck w.r.t. to the color cj , formally, 

σ(Ck, c j ) ⊆ Ck

that contains cj (Ck) mod pj points of color cj if pj ∤ cj (Ck), otherwise it contains pj points of color cj .

• σj = P  

> Ck∈C

σ(Ck, c j ) (Note σj must be a multiple of pj )

• δ(Ck, c j ): Ceficit of Ck w.r.t. to the color cj , δ(Ck, c j ) ⊆ V \ Ck that contains pj − | σ(Ck, c j )|

points. 

• κj (Ck): Cut cost of Ck w.r.t. a color cj , formally 

κj (Ck) = |σ(Ck, c j )|(|Ck| − | σ(Ck, c j )|)

• μj (Ck): Merge cost of Ck w.r.t. a color cj , formally 

μj (Ck) = |δ(Ck, c j )|(|Ck|)

Now, let’s discuss the algorithm create-pdc .

Input: A clustering C of data points, a set of colors χ = {c1, c 2, . . . , c d}, and a desired proportion vector p = ( p1, . . . , p d) such that c1(V ) : c2(V ) : · · · : cd(V ) = p1 : p2 : · · · : pd.

Goal: Convert the input clustering C into a p-divisible clustering M where each cluster contains a multiple of pj points for each color cj .

Description of the subroutine create-pdc :

• For each color cj , prepare σj /p j empty extra clusters {P1, P 2, . . . , P σj /p j }

122 • For each cluster Ci ∈ C :

– If the number of surplus cj -colored points in Ci is small ( ≤ pj /2), that is |σ(Ci, c j )| ≤ pj /2

mark Ci for cutting ( cut set). 

– Otherwise, mark it for merging ( merge set). 

• While there are clusters in the cut set: 

– cut the surplus σ(Ck, c j ) from cluster Ck, that is Ck = Ck \σ(Ck, c j ) and try to distribute it: 

∗ If there are clusters in Cℓ ∈ merge , donate surplus to them using their deficits. That is 

Cℓ = Cℓ ∪ T. 

where 

T ⊆ σ(Ck, c j )

of size min( |σ(Ck, c j )|, |δ(Cℓ, c j )|).

∗ Otherwise, distribute the surplus to a prepared cluster Pm ∈extra clusters , en-suring that each such cluster is of size pj . That is 

Pm = Pm ∪ Q. 

where 

Q ⊆ σ(Ck, c j )

of size min( pj , |σ(Ck, c j )|, |σ(Ck, c j )| − | Pm|).

• After all CUT clusters are processed, handle the remaining MERGE clusters: 

– Pick a cluster with the minimum cut-merge cost difference and distribute its surplus, similar to the above step. 

– Do it until all the deficits are satisfied. Note that in the previous step, we may pick a cluster multiple times. We provide the pseudocode of the algorithm create-pdc in Algorithm 11. Now, we are ready to describe the algorithm fair-general .

Description of the algorithm fair-general : The algorithm fair-general proceeds in two stages. First, we apply the algorithm create-pdc to the input clustering C to obtain a p-divisible clustering M. Then, we apply the algorithm make-pdc-fair on M to obtain the final fair clustering 

F.123 4.2.2 Approximation Guarantee of fair-general 

In this section, we analyze the algorithm fair-general presented earlier and show that it satisfies the approximation guarantee stated in Theorem 7. To analyze fair-general , first let us analyze the subroutine create-pdc . More specifically, we prove the following lemma. 

Lemma 4.2.1. Given a clustering C, the algorithm create-pdc outputs a clustering M s.t. M is 

O(|χ|)-close-p-divisible clustering to C.Proof. For a color cj ∈ χ, we created two sets cut and merge in the algorithm create-pdc . Let us now define two cases. 

• Cut case for color cj : Cut-Case (cj ):If X 

> Ck∈cut

|σ(Ck, c j )| ≥ X 

> Ck∈merge

|μ(Ck, c j )|

• Merge case for color cj : Merge-Case (cj ):If X 

> Ck∈cut

|σ(Ck, c j )| < X 

> Ck∈merge

|μ(Ck, c j )|

For Cut-Case (cj ), let us define some costs incurred by our algorithm create-pdc 

• From each cluster Ck ∈ cut , create-pdc cuts the surplus part σ(Ck, c j ) from Ck. Hence, the cost paid for cutting these surplus points is the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ σ(Ck, c j )

and v ∈ (Ck \ σ(Ck, c j )) . We denote this by: 

exp 1(M)cj = X 

> Ck∈cut

|σ(Ck, c j )|(|Ck| − | σ(Ck, c j )|) (4.28) 

• For each cluster Cm ∈ merge , the algorithm create-pdc merges the deficit amount |δ(Cm, c j )|

to these clusters. Hence, the cost paid for merging the deficit to Cm is the number of pairs 

(u, v ) such that u ∈ δ(Cm, c j ) and v ∈ Cm

exp 2(M)cj = X

> Cm∈merge

|δ(Cm, c j )|| Cm| (4.29) 

• The σ(Ck, c j ) points that are cut from Ck can get merged with the surplus of other clusters 

σ(Cℓ, c j ) (say) which are also cut from a cluster Cℓ̸ = Ck. We call the cost of merging σ(Ck, c j )

with the surplus of other clusters as exp 3(M)cj

Let, σ(Ck, c j ) gets further divided into multiple parts of size α1, . . . , α t, so we get, 

exp 3(M)cj ≤ X 

> Ck∈C

12

> t

X

> i=1

αi(pj − αi) (4.30) 124 In the above expression we provide an upper bound on the number of pairs (u, v ) such that 

u ∈ σ(Ck, c x) and v ∈ V \ Ck that are present together in a cluster in the clustering M. The above expression provides such an upper bound because of the fact that the surpluses which we cut from the clusters in the cut in our algorithm is used to fulfil the deficit of a cluster 

Cm ∈ merge where m̸ = k, ℓ and we know δ(Cm, c j ) < p j .

• These σ(Ck, c j ) points from Ck can also further be split into several parts W1, W 2, . . . , W t

(say). These parts of σ(Ck, c j ) points belong to different clusters in M and thus would incur some cost. We call this cost as exp 4(M)cj .

exp 4(M)cj = X 

> Ck∈C

12

> t

X

> s=1

|Ws|(σ(Ck, c j ) − | Ws|) (4.31) In the above expression, we count the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u, v ∈ σ(Ck, c j ) but present in different clusters in the clustering M.For Merge-Case (cj ), let us define some costs incurred by our algorithm create-pdc .

• In this case for a cluster Ck ∈ C , we may cut multiple subsets of size pj and a single subset of size σ(Ck, c j ). Let us assume Yk,z denotes the zth such subset of the cluster Ck and yk,z 

takes the value 1 if we cut zth such subset from Ck. The cost of cutting zth such subset from 

Ck is given as 

κ0(Ck) = |σ(Ck, c j )|(|Ck| − | σ(Ck, c j )|)(cost of cutting the 0th subset )

κz (Ck) = pj (|Ck| − | σ(Ck, c j )| − zp j )(cost of cutting the zth subset for z ≥ 1) 

Thus, we define 

exp 5(M)cj = X 

> Ck∈C
> t

X

> z=0

yk,z κz (Ck) (4.32) where 



t = cj (Ck) − | σ(Ck, c j )|

pj



• Suppose the algorithm create-pdc merges at a cluster Cm ∈ merge ′. Here, merge ′ ⊆

merge denotes the set of clusters where the algorithm create-pdc has merged the deficit amount of points. More specifically, it is defined as 

Cm ∈ merge ′ ⇐⇒ ∃ Mℓ ∈ M 

s.t. Cm ⊆ Mℓ

Then, the cost paid for merging the deficit to Cm is 

exp 6(M)cj = X

> Cm∈merge ′

δ(Cm, c j )|Cm| (4.33) 125 • The |Yk,z | points that are cut from Ck can get merged with the subsets Yℓ,z ′ of some other cluster Cℓ. We call the cost of merging a subset Yk,z of Ck with the subset Yℓ,z ′ of another cluster Cℓ as exp 7(M )cj .Let, Yk,z gets further divided into multiple parts of size α1, . . . , α t, so we get, 

exp 7(M)cj ≤ X 

> Ck∈C

12

> t

X

> i=1

αi(pj − αi) (4.34) 

• The |Yk,z | points that are cut from Ck can also further be split into several parts 

W1, W 2, . . . , W t (say). These parts of Yk,z can belong to different clusters in M (output of create-pdc ) and thus would incur some cost. We call this cost as exp 8(M cj ).

exp 8(M)cj = X 

> Ck∈C

12

> t

X

> j=1

|Wj |(|Wi,z | − | Wj |) (4.35) There is a cost which can occur in both the Cut-Case (cj ) and Merge-Case (cj ).

• Suppose for a cluster Ck ∈ C , deficit of cj and another color cr ∈ χ is filled up by the subsets of some other clusters Cℓ and Cm in C respectively such that ℓ̸ = m then this would incur some cost which is the number of pairs (u, v ) such that u ∈ δ(Ck, c j ) and v ∈ δ(Ck, c r).

exp 9(M)cj = X 

> Ck∈D

|δ(Ck, c j )|| δ(Ck, c r)| (4.36) Let us define pay(() M)cj as the number of pairs (u, v ) such that at least one of u and v is colored cj and the following conditions are true. 

• u and v are present in the same cluster in C but in separate clusters in M.

• u and v are present in the separate clusters in C but in the same cluster in M.It is straightforward to see that, 

pay( M)cj ≤

> 9

X

> i=1

cost i(M)cj

and 

dist( C, M) = X 

> cj∈χ

pay( M)cj (4.37) Now, to prove the above Lemma 4.2.1, we take the help of the following claims from [CCD +25]. 

Claim 4.2.2. [CCD +25] exp 1(M)cj + exp 2(M)cj + exp 3(M)cj + exp 4(M)cj ≤ 3.5dist( C, M∗)

Claim 4.2.3. [CCD +25] exp 5(M)cj + exp 6(M)cj + exp 7(M)cj + exp 8(M)cj ≤ 3dist( C, M∗)

Claim 4.2.4. [CCD +25] exp 9(M)cj ≤ dist( C, M∗)

126 Now we complete the proof of Lemma 4.2.1 By Claim 4.2.2, Claim 4.2.3, Claim 4.2.4 and Eq. (4.37) we get 

dist( C, M) = X 

> cj∈χ

3.5dist( C, M∗) + 3dist( C, M∗)+ dist( C, M∗)= X 

> cj∈χ

7.5dist( C, M∗)= O(|χ|)dist( C, M∗)

Now we are ready to prove Theorem 7. 

Proof of Theorem 7. To prove the theorem, we describe an algorithm fair-general that proceeds in two stages. First, we apply the algorithm create-pdc to the input clustering C to obtain a 

p-divisible clustering M that is O(|χ|)-close to C (by Lemma 4.2.1). Then, we apply the algorithm 

make-pdc-fair on M to obtain the final fair clustering F, which is O(|χ|2.81 )-close to M (by Lemma 4.1.7). By combining the guarantees from both steps, we conclude that F is O(|χ|3.81 )-close fair clustering to the input C.

dist( C, F) ≤ dist( C, M) + dist( M, F) (triangle inequality) 

≤ O(|χ|)dist( C, F∗) + O(|χ|2.81 )dist( M, F∗)

≤ O(|χ|)dist( C, F∗) + O(|χ|2.81 )(dist( C, M)+ dist( C, F∗)) (triangle inequality) 

≤ O(|χ| + |χ|3.81 + |χ|2.81 )dist( C, F∗)

≤ O(|χ|3.81 )dist( C, F∗)

This completes the proof of Theorem 7. 127 Chapter 5 

# Implications to Weighted Fair Correlation and Fair Consensus Clustering 

Building on the algorithms developed in the previous sections that compute an α-close fair clustering for a given (possibly unfair) clustering D, we now show how these results can be leveraged to obtain approximation algorithms for the weighted fair correlation clustering and fair consensus clustering problems. 

# 5.1 Implication to weighted Fair Correlation Clustering 

In this section, we present an algorithm for computing an approximate weighted fair correlation clustering, assuming access to a procedure that can compute an α-close fair clustering for any given (potentially unfair) clustering D. We further provide a detailed analysis of the algorithm and establish its approximation guarantee. Specifically, we prove the following result. 

Theorem 2. Suppose we have an algorithm to find an α-close fair clustering to any given unfair clustering D, then given a correlation clustering instance G , there exists an algorithm to find an 

(α + ρ + αρ ) - approximate weighted fair correlation clustering under probability constraints, where 

ρ is the state-of-the-art approximation factor for the weighted correlation clustering problem under probability constraints. Proof. Let us first describe the algorithm fairfyCC , which computes a fair clustering for a given weighted correlation clustering instance G.

• Input: Weighted Correlation clustering instance G.

• Output: A fair clustering F.

• Procedure: 

1. Compute a clustering D from the weighted insatnce G using a ρ-approximation algorithm to find an unfair correlation clustering on a weighted instance. 128 2. Apply the closest fair clustering algorithm to D to obtain a fair clustering F that is 

α-close to D.3. Return F.Let us now prove that F is (α + ρ + αρ ) approximate fair correlation clustering of G.We know for a weighted correlation clustering instance G, by definition for a clustering K on G

we have 

cost( K) = X

> u∼Kv

w−(u, v ) + X

> u≁Kv

w+(u, v )

recall where u ∼K v denotes that u and v are together in the clustering K and u ≁K v denotes that they are separated in K.Let F∗ 

> corr

be the optimal fair correlation clustering of G. We need to prove that 

cost( F) ≤ (α + ρ + αρ ) cost( F∗

> corr

).

To show the above, we need to prove the following claims 

Claim 5.1.1. For any two arbitrary clusterings M and K on a vertex set V we have 

cost( M) ≤ dist( M, K) + cost( K)

Proof. We have 

cost( M) = X

> u∼Mv

w−(u, v ) + X

> u≁Mv

w+(u, v )= X

> u∼Mv
> ∧u∼Kv

w−(u, v ) + X

> u∼Mv
> ∧u≁Kv

w−(u, v )+ X

> u≁Mv
> ∧u∼Kv

w+(u, v ) + X

> u≁Mv
> ∧u≁Kv

w+(u, v )

Again, similarly, we have, 

cost( K) = X

> u∼Kv
> ∧u∼Mv

w−(u, v ) + X

> u∼Kv
> ∧u≁Mv

w−(u, v )+ X

> u≁Kv
> ∧u∼Mv

w+(u, v ) + X

> u≁Kv
> ∧u≁Mv

w+(u, v )

We also have, 

dist( M, K) = X

> u∼Mv
> ∧u≁Kv

1 + X

> u≁Mv
> ∧u∼Kv

1

Hence, 

cost( K) + dist( M, K) = X

> u∼Mv
> ∧u≁Kv

(1 + w+(u, v )) + X

> u≁Mv
> ∧u∼Kv

(1 + w−(u, v )) 

129 + X

> u∼Kv
> ∧u∼Mv

w−(u, v ) + X

> u≁Kv
> ∧u≁Mv

w+(u, v )

≥ cost( M) (since w+(u, v ), w −(u, v ) ≤ 1)

Claim 5.1.2. For any two arbitrary clusterings M and K on a vertex set V we have 

dist( M, K) ≤ cost( M) + cost( K)

Proof. We have 

dist( M, K) = X

> u∼Mv
> ∧u≁Kv

1 + X

> u≁Mv
> ∧u∼Kv

1cost( M) = X

> u∼Mv
> ∧u∼Kv

w−(u, v ) + X

> u∼Mv
> ∧u≁Kv

w−(u, v )+ X

> u≁Mv
> ∧u∼Kv

w+(u, v ) + X

> u≁Mv
> ∧u≁Kv

w+(u, v )

and 

cost( K) = X

> u∼Kv
> ∧u∼Mv

w−(u, v ) + X

> u∼Kv
> ∧u≁Mv

w−(u, v )+ X

> u≁Kv
> ∧u∼Mv

w+(u, v ) + X

> u≁Kv
> ∧u≁Mv

w+(u, v )

Hence, 

cost( M) + cost( K) = X

> u∼Kv
> ∧u∼Mv

2w−(u, v ) + X

> u∼Kv
> ∧u≁Mv

1+ X

> u≁Kv
> ∧u∼Mv

1 + X

> u≁Kv
> ∧u≁Mv

2w+(u, v )

(since, w+(u, v ) + w−(u, v ) = 1 )

≥ dist( M, K)

Now we are ready to prove Theorem 2. 

cost( F) ≤ cost( D) + dist( D, F) (5.1) 

≤ ρ cost( F∗

> corr

) + dist( D, F) (5.2) 

≤ ρ cost( F∗

> corr

) + αdist( D, F∗D) (5.3) 130 ≤ ρ cost( F∗

> corr

) + αdist( D, F∗

> corr

) (5.4) 

≤ ρ cost( F∗

> corr

) + α(cost( D) + cost( F∗

> corr

)) (5.5) 

≤ ρ cost( F∗

> corr

) + α(ρ cost( F∗

> corr

) + cost( F∗

> corr

)) (5.6) 

= ( α + ρ + αρ ) cost( F∗

> corr

).

• The inequality Eq. (5.1) is by Claim 5.1.1. 

• The inequality Eq. (5.2) is since D is ρ-approximate correlation clustering. 

• The inequality Eq. (5.3) is since F is α-approximate closest fair to D.

• The inequality Eq. (5.4) is since F∗ 

> corr

is also a fair clustering. 

• The inequality Eq. (5.5) is by Claim 5.1.2. 

• The inequality Eq. (5.6) is again since D is ρ-approximate correlation clustering. 

# 5.2 Implication to Fair Consensus Clustering 

In this section, we present an algorithm for computing an approximate fair consensus clustering, assuming access to a procedure that can compute an α-close fair clustering for any given (poten-tially unfair) clustering D. We also provide a detailed analysis of the algorithm and establish its approximation guarantee. Specifically, we prove the following result. 

Theorem 3. Suppose we have an algorithm to find an α-close fair clustering to any given unfair clustering D, then given m input clusterings, C1, . . . , Cm , there exists an algorithm to find an 

(α + 2) -approximate fair consensus clustering. Proof. Let us consider the following algorithm: Suppose we are given m clusterings C1, . . . , Cm.Then, for each Ci, compute an α-close fair clustering Fi. Then, output the fair clustering Fk that minimizes the ℓ-mean objective function, i.e., 

Fk = arg min 

> i



> m

X

> j=1

(dist( Cj , Fi)) ℓ



> 1/ℓ

.

It remains to argue that the above algorithm achieves (α+2) -approximation to the fair consensus clustering problem. Let F∗ 

> con

be an (arbitrary) optimal fair consensus clustering, and let Ci∗ be a closest (breaking ties arbitrarily) clustering among C1, C2, · · · , Cm, to F∗

> con

. We emphasize that we consider Ci∗ only for the sake of the analysis. Since F∗ 

> con

is a fair clustering, we get 

dist( Ci∗ , Fi∗ ) ≤ α · dist( Ci∗ , F∗

> con

). (5.7) We next derive the following 131 

> m

X

> j=1

(dist( Cj , Fi∗ )) ℓ



> 1/ℓ

≤



> m

X

> j=1

(dist( Cj , F∗

> con

) + dist( F∗

> con

, Fi∗ )) ℓ



> 1/ℓ

(By the triangle inequality) 

≤



> m

X

> j=1

(dist( Cj , F∗

> con

) + dist( F∗

> con

, Ci∗ ) + dist( Ci∗ , Fi∗ )) ℓ



> 1/ℓ

(By the triangle inequality) 

≤



> m

X

> j=1

(dist( Cj , F∗

> con

) + dist( F∗

> con

, Ci∗ ) + α · dist( Ci∗ , F∗

> con

)) ℓ



> 1/ℓ

(By Eq. (5.7)) 

≤



> m

X

> j=1

(dist( Cj , F∗

> con

) + dist( Cj , F∗

> con

) + α · dist( Cj , F∗

> con

)) ℓ



> 1/ℓ

(Since Ci∗ is closest to F∗

> con

)

= ( α + 2) 



> m

X

> j=1

(dist( Cj , F∗

> con

)) ℓ



> 1/ℓ

.

Now, since our algorithm outputs Fk that minimizes the ℓ-mean objective function, the approx-imation guarantee follows, and that concludes the proof. 132 Chapter 6 

# Fair Consensus Clustering in Streaming setting 

In this chapter, we present an algorithm algo-fair-con-stream for solving fair consensus clustering in a streaming setting. Recall in the fair consensus clustering problem, the input is the set of clusterings I = {C1, . . . , C m} on a set of vertices V (with |V | = n) and our goal is to output a fair clustering F, such that 

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

≤ β

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, F∗

> con

)ℓ

!1/ℓ 

where F∗ 

> con

is an optimal fair consensus clustering, the distance, dist( ·, ·) between two clusterings is the measured by the number of pairs (u, v ) that are together in one clustering but separated by the other, and β ∈ R>1, ℓ ∈ Z>1 are some parameters. Let us now describe the streaming model. We consider an insertion-only streaming model. The input is a sequence of triples (p, j, b ), where: 

• p = ( u, v ) is an unordered pair of vertices in V ,

• j ∈ [m] identifies a clustering Cj ∈ I, and 

• b ∈ { 0, 1} indicates whether u and v lie in the same cluster in the clustering Cj (b = 0 ) or in different clusters ( b = 1 ). Here, a triple (( u, v ), j, b ) refers an information about the clustering Cj . For each clustering Cj ,we have n2 such tuples, hence the length of the stream is mn 2. These triples (p, j, b ) can arrive in any arbitrary order. Let us name the above streaming model as pairwise streaming model . Our main result is stated in the following theorem. 

Theorem 11. Suppose there exists an approximation algorithm for fair correlation clustering with running time t1(n), and assume oracle access to an α-approximate closest fair clustering algo-rithm. Then, there exists a (α + 1 .995) -approximation algorithm for fair consensus clustering in the 

pairwise streaming model that uses O(n log m) space and has query time 

O n2 log 4 m + t1(n) log 3 m .

133 6.1 Details of the algorithm: algo-fair-con-stream 

In this section, we present our streaming algorithm, algo-fair-con-stream for fair consensus clustering . The algorithm relies on a subroutine, denoted by find-candidates , which we describe first. The subroutine find-candidates takes as input a set of clusterings I and outputs a set of candidate clusterings eF. The crucial guarantee is that eF contains at least one fair clustering F that achieves a good approximation. The subroutine find-candidates assumes access to an α-close fair clustering algorithm. The candidate set eF is constructed as follows. For each clustering Ci ∈ I, we include its α-close fair clustering FCi in eF. In addition, for every ordered triple 

T = {C i, Cj , Ck} ∈ I × I × I,

we add to eF a clustering Ti,j,k obtained by applying the subroutine ClusterFitting to T .The pseudocodes of find-candidates and ClusterFitting are given in Algorithm 2 and Al-gorithm 3, respectively. 

Algorithm 2: find-candidates (I)

Input: A set I of clusterings 

Output: A set eF of candidate fair clusterings  

> 1

Initialize an empty set eF; 

> 2

for each Ci ∈ I do  

> 3

Fi ← a α-close fair clustering to Ci ; 

> 4

eF ← eF ∪ {F i} ; 

> 5

for each T = {C i, Cj , Ck} of I do  

> 6

Ti,j,k ← ClusterFitting (T ); 

> 7

eF ← eF ∪ { Ti,j,k } 

> 8

return eF

Algorithm 3: ClusterFitting (T )

Input : Clusterings T = {C i, Cj , Ck}

Output: A fair clustering Ti,j,k  

> 1

V (G) ← V 

> 2

E+(G) ← { (a, b )|a, b ∈ V, a and b are together in at least 2 clusterings } 

> 3

E−(G) ← { (a, b )|a, b ∈ V, a and b are separated in at least 2 clusterings } 

> 4

Ti,j,k ← a γ-approximation fair correlation clustering of G = ( V (G), E +(G) ∪ E−(G)) . 

> 5

return Ti,j,k 

Now we are ready to describe the algorithm algo-fair-con-stream . We work in the insertion-only stream described previously. The algorithm maintains two memory structures in parallel: 1. Sampled Store 1 (M1): Prior to the arrival of the stream, we independently sample 4g log m

134 indices j1, . . . , j 4g log m from [m] for some parameter g we fix the value of it later. For these sampled indices, all their corresponding triples that appear in the stream are stored in M1.2. Sampled Store 2 (M2): Similarly, before the stream starts, we sample 64 ε−2 log m indices 

k1, . . . , k t from [m], where t = 64 ε−2 log m and 0 < ε ≤ 1. For these sampled indices, all their triples are stored in M2 as they appear in the stream. After the stream ends. 1. We use union-find, to construct the clusterings Cj1 , . . . , Cjlog m from its triples stored in M1.Then we apply a subroutine find-candidates (Algorithm 2) on these ⌈log m⌉ clusterings to get a candidate set of fair clusterings eF. The subroutine find-candidates assumes access to a α-close fair clustering algorithm. 2. We use union-find, to construct the clusterings Ck1 , . . . , Ckt from its triples stored in M2. Let, 

W = {C k1 , . . . , Ckt }.We use W to find the best fair clustering F ∈ eF with respect to W, more specifically we find 

F = arg min  

> F′∈eF

X

> Ci∈W

dist( Ci, F′)

3. Return F.We provide the pseudocode of algo-fair-con-stream in the appendix. 

# 6.2 Analysis of algo-fair-con-stream 

In this section, we analyze the approximation guarantee of the algorithm algo-fair-con-stream ,along with its time and space complexities. 

6.2.1 Approximation Guarantee 

We now establish the approximation guarantee of algo-fair-con-stream and thus prove Theo-rem 11. The Theorem 11 is obtained by appropriately instantiating the parameters in the following more general lemma. 

Lemma 6.2.1. Suppose there exists an algorithm with running time t2(n) that, given a clustering over n points, computes an α–close fair clustering. Further, assume there exists an γ–approximation algorithm for fair correlation clustering on a graph with n vertices, running in time t1(n).Let η > 0, 0 < β < 1, c > 1, s > 1, and g > s be fixed parameters satisfying sc − s − 2c > 0.Then, for any collection of m clusterings over n points, there exists a randomized algorithm that, with probability at least 1 − 1 

> m

, runs in time 

O n2 log 4 m + t1(n) log 3 m ,

uses O(n log m) space, and outputs a 

 1+ ε 

> 1−ε

· r



–approximate fair consensus clustering, where      

> r= max
> (
> α+ 2 −(α+ 1) β,

135 α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g − s) + sg(s − 1) − 2ηc ,α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g(2 c + s) − sc ) + sc g(cs − s − 2c) − 2



1 − 1

s − 1

c



η, 

1 + 3( γ + 1) η

)

.

We now focus on proving Lemma 6.2.1. To this end, we first introduce the necessary notation. For any clustering D, we define its objective value as 

Obj ( I, D) = 

X

> Ci∈I

dist( Ci, D)ℓ



> 1
> ℓ

,

where ℓ > 1 is a fixed constant. Fix an optimal fair clustering F∗

> con

. For notational convenience, we define 

OPT := Obj ( I, F∗

> con

) and AVG := OPT 

m .

For each clustering Ci, let Ii denote the set of unordered vertex pairs (u, v ) ∈ V × V such that 

u and v are clustered together (respectively, separated) in F∗

> con

, but are separated (respectively, clustered together) in Ci. By definition, this implies 

dist( Ci, F∗

> con

) = |Ii| .

Let us also define 

Sh = {C j | | Ih ∩ Ij | > η AVG }.

for some parameter η > 0.We now prove the following lemma. 

Lemma 6.2.2. If there exists a clustering Ci such that |Ii| ≤ (1 − β)AVG , then 

Obj ( I, FCi ) ≤  α + 2 − (α + 1) βOPT ,

where FCi denotes an α-approximate closest fair clustering to Ci returned by the closest fair clustering algorithm. Proof. By the triangle inequality, we have 

Obj ( I, FCi ) = 

> m

X

> j=1

dist( Cj , FCi )

≤

> m

X

> j=1



dist( Cj , F∗

> con

) + dist( F∗

> con

, Ci) + dist( Ci, FCi )



≤ OPT + mdist( F∗

> con

, Ci) + mα dist( F∗

> con

, Ci)

≤ OPT + (1 + α)(1 − β)mAVG =  α + 2 − (α + 1) βOPT .

The second inequality follows from the fact that FCi is an α-close fair clustering to Ci, and the final inequality uses the assumption dist( F∗

> con

, Ci) = |Ii| ≤ (1 − β)AVG .136 Now suppose there exists a constant g > 1 such that at least mg clusterings Ci satisfy |Ii| ≤ 

(1 − β)AVG for some 0 < β < 1. Then, with high probability, our algorithm samples at least one such clustering. Let F be an α-close fair clustering corresponding to a sampled clustering of this type. By Lemma 6.2.2, we obtain 

Obj ( I, F) ≤  α + 2 − (α + 1) βOPT .

Hence, in the remaining part of the analysis, we assume that the number of clusterings Ci with 

|Ii| ≤ (1 − β)AVG is less than mg . More specifically, we have the following ordering 

|I1| ≤ | I2| ≤ . . . |It| ≤ (1 − β)AVG < |It+1 | ≤ · · · ≤ | Im| , (6.1) where t < mg ≤ t + 1 .We prove the following lemmas under the assumption (6.1). 

Lemma 6.2.3. Suppose that (6.1) holds. For any t < h ≤ ms , where s is a constant satisfying 

s < g , we have 

|Ih| ≤ 



1 + β(g − s) + sg(s − 1) 



AVG .

Proof. Since OPT = mAVG is the sum of all |Ii|, we have 

mAVG = 

> m

X

> i=1

|Ii|≥

> h−1

X

> i=t+1

|Ii| +

> m

X

> i=h

|Ii|

> (h − t − 1)(1 − β)AVG + ( m − h + 1) |Ih| ,

where the last inequality follows from (6.1). Rearranging terms yields 

|Ih| < m − (1 − β)( h − t − 1) 

m − h + 1 AVG =



1 + β(h − 1) 

m − h + 1 + t(1 − β)

m − h + 1 



AVG .

Since h ≤ ms , we have 

β(h − 1) 

m − h + 1 = β 

> mh−1

− 1 ≤ βs − 1 .

Moreover, using t < mg , we obtain 

tm − h + 1 < m/g m − m/s + 1 ≤ sg(s − 1) .

Since 0 < β < 1, it follows that 

t(1 − β)

m − h + 1 < s(1 − β)

g(s − 1) .

137 Combining the above bounds, we conclude that 

|Ih| <



1 + βs − 1 + s(1 − β)

g(s − 1) 



AVG =



1 + β(g − s) + sg(s − 1) 



AVG .

Lemma 6.2.4. Suppose that (6.1) holds. If there is a clustering Ch with t < h ≤ ms satisfying 

|Sh| ≥ mc for some constant c > 1, then 

Obj ( I, FCh ) ≤



α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g − s) + sg(s − 1) − 2ηc



OPT .

Proof. As (6.1) holds, applying Lemma 6.2.3 with h ≤ ms , we obtain |Ih| ≤ (1 + β(g−s)+ sg(s−1) )AVG .

Obj ( I, FCh ) = 

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, FCh )

≤

> m

X

> i=1

(dist( Ci, Ch) + dist( Ch, FCh )) 

≤

> m

X

> i=1

(|Ii| + ( α + 1) |Ih| − 2 |Ii ∩ Ih|)

≤ OPT + ( α + 1) 



1 + β(g − s) + sg(s − 1) 



OPT − | Sh| 2ηAVG 

≤



α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g − s) + sg(s − 1) − 2ηc



OPT .

We define 

Nh := {C j |h < j ≤ h + mc + ms : |Ij ∩ Ih| ≤ ηAVG },

Fh,k := {C j | | Ij ∩ Ih| ≤ ηAVG and |Ij ∩ Ik| ≤ ηAVG }.

Lemma 6.2.5. Suppose that (6.1) holds. If for some h ≤ ms with |Sh| < mc , there exists a clustering 

Ck ∈ Nh such that |Fh,k | < ms , then                      

> Obj  I,FCk
> ≤
> 
> α+ 2 + ( α+ 1) β(g(2 c+s)−sc ) + sc )
> g(cs −s−2c)−2
> 
> 1−1
> s−1
> c
> 
> η
> 
> OPT .

Proof. With Ck ∈ Nh, by definition of Nh, it follows that k ≤ h + mc + ms ≤ msc/ (2 c+s) , where the last inequality is obtained by using the assumption h ≤ ms . Applying Lemma 6.2.3 with k ≤ msc/ (2 c+s) ,we get |Ik| ≤ 



1 + β(g(2 c+s)−sc )+ sc g(sc −s−2c)



AVG .We now turn to give a lower bound for |Sk|. Note that by definition of Fh,k , for every clustering 

Cj ∈ I, if Cj /∈ Fh,k , then at least one of |Ij ∩ Ih| > η OPT or |Ij ∩ Ik| > η OPT must hold. In other 138 words, it must be the case that Cj ∈ Sh or Cj ∈ Sk (or both) holds. Hence, |Sh| + |Sk| ≥ | I| − | Fh,k |.Using the assumptions |Sh| < mc and |Fh,k | < ms , we obtain |Sk| ≥ m − mc − ms .Finally, using |Ik| ≤ 



1 + β(g(2 c+s)−sc )+ sc g(sc −s−2c)



AVG and |Sk| ≥ m − mc − ms , we have 

Obj ( I, FCk )

≤

> m

X

> i=1

(|Ii| + (1 + α) |Ik| − 2 |Ii ∩ Ik|)

≤ OPT + ( α + 1) 



1 + β(g(2 c + s) − sc ) + sc g(cs − s − 2c)



OPT − | Sk| 2ηAVG 

≤



α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g(2 c + s) − sc ) + sc g(cs − s − 2c) − 2



1 − 1

s − 1

c



η



OPT .

Lemma 6.2.6. If there is a set T = {C i, Cj , Ck} such that, for all r̸ = s ∈ { i, j, k }, we have 

|Ir ∩ Is| ≤ ηAVG , then Obj ( I, T i,j,k ) ≤ (1 + 3( γ + 1) η)OPT .Proof. We define a set of bad pairs 

B = ( Ii ∩ Ij ) ∪ (Ij ∩ Ik) ∪ (Ik ∩ Ii),

that is, B contains all pairs of points (a, b ) such that a, b are together (resp. separated) in a majority of clusterings in T , while in F∗

> con

, a and b are separated (resp. together). Note that |B| ≤ 3ηAVG , as |Ir ∩ Is| ≤ ηAVG , for all r̸ = s ∈ { i, j, k }.Let G be a graph with vertex set V and the edge set E(G) = E+(G) ∪ E−(G), where 

E+(G) = {(a, b ) | a, b ∈ V, a and b are together in at least 2 clusterings among Ci, Cj , Ck} , and 

E−(G) = {(a, b ) | a, b ∈ V, a and b are separated in at least 2 clusterings among Ci, Cj , Ck} .

Observe that for each pair of vertices (a, b ), if (a, b ) /∈ B, then a, b are together (resp. separated) in F∗ 

> con

if (a, b ) is an edge in E+(G) (resp. E−(G)). On the other hand, if (a, b ) ∈ B, then a, b 

are separated (resp. together) if (a, b ) is an edge in E+(G) (resp. E−(G)). Therefore, if for every pair (a, b ) ∈ B, we flip their labels (from “ +” to “ −” and vice versa) we obtained a new graph G′

such that, any two vertices in a same cluster in F∗ 

> con

are connected by an “ +” edge, and any two vertices is different clusters in F∗ 

> con

are connected by a “ −” edge. Note that, the correlation cost of a clustering C of G can be viewed as the number of pairs (a, b ) whose labels need to be flipped so that, the edges inside every cluster of C are all “ +” edges, and the edges between the clusters of C

are all “ −” edges. Hence, F∗ 

> con

has a correlation cost cost( F∗

> con

) = |B|.Let Ti,j,k be the output of ClusterFitting (T ) (Algorithm 3). In other words, Ti,j,k is a clus-tering obtained by running a γ-approximation fair correlation clustering algorithm on G. Then 

cost( Ti,j,k ) ≤ γ |B|, as the cost of an optimal fair correlation clustering is at most |B|. Moreover, the number of pairs (a, b ) that are clustered differently between Ti,j,k and F∗ 

> con

is at most, every pair in B and the γ |B| pairs that are flipped by the approximation fair correlation clustering algorithm. As a result, we get 139 dist( Ti,j,k , F∗

> con

) ≤ | B| + γ |B|≤ (1 + γ)3 ηAVG (as |B| ≤ 3ηAVG) .

It remains to bound the objective value of Ti,j,k .

Obj ( I, T i,j,k ) = 

> m

X

> i=1

dist( Ci, T i,j,k )

≤

> m

X

> i=1

(dist( Ci, F∗

> con

) + dist( F∗

> con

, T i,j,k )) 

≤ OPT + m(1 + γ)3 ηAVG = (1 + 3( γ + 1) η)OPT .

Lemma 6.2.7. Suppose that the algorithm algo-fair-con-stream sampled two clusterings Ch

and Ck such that k ∈ Nh and |Fh,k | ≥ ms . Then, with probability at least 1 − m−4,the algorithm algo-fair-con-stream also sampled a clustering Cℓ such that, for Ti,j,k =

ClusterFitting ({C h, Ck, Cℓ}), the following holds: 

Obj ( I, T i,j,k ) ≤ (1 + 3( γ + 1) η) OPT .

Proof. Since |Fh,k | ≥ ms , the probability that at least one clustering Cℓ in Fh,k is sampled is at least 

1 −



1 − 4g log mm

 ms

≥ 1 − e−4g log m/s = 1 − 1

m4g/s ≥ 1 − m−4.

By definition of Nh and Fh,k , for all r, s ∈ { h, k, ℓ }, we have |Ir ∩ Is| ≤ ηAVG . Applying Lemma 6.2.6, we obtain Obj ( I, T i,j,k ) ≤ (1 + 3( γ + 1) η)OPT .Now, let us prove Lemma 6.2.1 

Proof of Lemma 6.2.1. If the number of clusterings Ci with |Ii| ≤ (1 −β)AVG is at least mg , then with probability at least 1 − m−4, our algorithm samples at least one such clustering. Using Lemma 6.2.2 and let F be a α-close fair clustering to such sampled clustering, we have Obj ( I, F) ≤ (α + 2 −

(α + 1) β)OPT .It remains to consider the case when the number of such clusterings Ci is less than mg . With probability at least 1−m−4(1 −s/g ), our algorithm samples at least one clustering Ch with mg < h ≤ ms .If |Sh| ≥ mc , then by Lemma 6.2.4, let FCh be a α-close fair clustering to Ch, we have 

Obj ( I, FCh ) ≤



α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g − s) + sg(s − 1) − 2ηc



OPT .

If |Sh| < mc , then |Nh| ≥ ms . It follows that with probability at least 1 − m−4g/s , we sample a clustering Ck ∈ Nh. If |Fh,k | < ms , then by Lemma 6.2.5, let FCk be a α-close fair clustering to Ck,we have                      

> Obj  I,FCk
> ≤
> 
> α+ 2 + ( α+ 1) β(g(2 c+s)−sc ) + sc )
> g(cs −s−2c)−2
> 
> 1−1
> s−1
> c
> 
> η
> 
> OPT .

140 If |Fh,k | ≥ ms , then by Lemma 6.2.7, with probability at least 1 − m−4, there exists a sampled clustering Cℓ such that, for Ti,j,k = ClusterFitting ({C h, Ck, Cℓ}), we have 

Obj ( I, T i,j,k ) ≤ (1 + 3( γ + 1) η) OPT .

Combining all the cases, with probability at least 1 − m−3, there is a fair clustering F ∈ eF such that Obj ( I, F) ≤ rOPT , where                                   

> r= max
> (
> (α+ 2 −(α+ 1) β),
> 
> α+ 2 + ( α+ 1) β(g−s) + sg(s−1) −2ηc
> 
> ,
> 
> α+ 2 + ( α+ 1) β(g(2 c+s)−sc ) + sc )
> g(cs −s−2c)−2
> 
> 1−1
> s−1
> c
> 
> η
> 
> ,
> (1 + 3( γ+ 1) η)
> )
> .

As the algorithm algo-fair-con-stream uses a set W of Ω( ε−2 log m) input clusterings sampled uniformly at random as a evaluation set, according to a result developed by Indyk [Ind99], [Ind01, Theorem 31], with probability at least 1 − 1 

> m

, our algorithm outputs a clustering F′ such that 

Obj ( I, F′) ≤ (1 + ε)Obj ( I, F). Therefore, with probability at least 1 − 1 

> m

, our algorithm outputs a fair clustering F′ with Obj ( I, F′) ≤ (1 + ε)rOPT .

6.2.2 Time and Space Complexity 

Now we analyse the time and space complexity of the algorithm algo-fair-con-stream .

Time Complexity. In M1 we store log m many clusterings. Hence, there are O(log 3 m) many candidate clusterings in eF. Computing a α-close fair clustering to each sampled clustering takes 

t2(n) log m time and running the procedure ClusterFitting on log 3 m triples of clusterings takes 

t1(n) log 3 m time. To find the best clustering in eF, we need to perform O(log 3 m) many checks. Now, in each check, we need to compute the distance between two clusterings, which takes O(n2) time, and since there are O(log m) clusterings in the W, the total time needed per check is O(n2 log m).Hence, overall for all checks, the time needed is O(n2 log 4 m). Hence, the overall time complexity is 

O(n2 log 4 m + t2(n) log m + t1(n) log 3 m)= O(n2 log 4 m + t1(n) log 3 m) (since t1(n) ≥ t2(n))

Space Complexity. In M1, we store information of ⌈log m⌉ many clusterings, hence we require a space of O(n log m) in M1. In M2 also, we store O(log m) clusterings; hence, in M2, too we need 

O(n log m) space. Hence, overall, the space complexity is O(n log m).

6.2.3 Proof of Main Theorem 

Now, we are ready to prove Theorem 11. To prove Theorem 11 we need to use Theorem 2. Recall Theorem 2 states that if there exists an algorithm to find α-close fair clustering to any given unfair clustering D, then given a correlation clustering instance G, there exists an algorithm to find an 

(α + ρ + αρ ) - approximate fair correlation clustering, where ρ is the state-of-the-art approximation factor for the correlation clustering problem. 141 Proof. From the previous section, we get that the time and space complexity of 

algo-fair-con-stream are O(n log m) and O(n2 + t1(n) log 3 m) respectively. We apply Lemma 6.2.1 and Theorem 2 with β = 172( α+1)( δ+1) ∈ (0 , 1) , η = 16( δ+1) , s = 4 , c = 3 ,and g ≥ max 



100 × 43 × (α + 1) 216( δ+1) 23 , 100 × 6 × (α + 1) 72( δ+1) 5



. Note that 

• 1 + 3( γ + 1) η = 1 + 3( α + 1)( δ + 1) η = α 

> 2

+ 1 .5.

• α + 2 − (α + 1) β = α + 2 − α+1 72( α+1)( δ+1) = α + 2 − 172( δ+1) < α + 1 .995 .

• α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g−s)+ sg(s−1) − 2ηc = α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g−4)+4 3g − 2η 

> 3

= α + 2 + 1216( δ+1) − 4β(α+1) 3g + 

> 4( α+1) 3g

− 19( δ+1) = α + 2 − 23 216( δ+1) − 4β(α+1) 3g + 4( α+1) 3g ≤ α + 2 − 23 216( δ+1) 99 100 < α + 1 .96 , where in the first inequality, we drop the negative term − 4β(α+1) 3g and use the choice of g so that  

> 4( δ+1) 3g

≤ 23 100 ×216( δ+1) , and the last inequality is due to δ = 1 .4371 .

• α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(g(2 c+s)−sc )+ sc ) 

> g(cs −s−2c)

− 2  1 − 1 

> s

− 1

> c

 η = α + 2 + ( α + 1) β(10 g−12)+12 2g − 5η 

> 6

= α + 2 +  

> 572( δ+1)

− 6β(α+1)  

> g

+ 6( α+1)  

> g

− 536( δ+1) ≤ α + 2 − 572( δ+1) − 6β(α+1)  

> g

+ 6( α+1)  

> g

≤ α + 2 − 572( δ+1) 99 100 <α + 1 .98 , where in the first inequality, we drop the negative term − 6β(α+1)  

> g

and use the choice of g so that 6( δ+1)  

> g

≤ 5100 ×72( δ+1) , and the last inequality is due to δ = 1 .4371 .Under this setting, Lemma 6.2.1 yields a streaming (α + 1 .995) -approximation fair consensus clus-tering algorithm using O(n log m) space, with a query time of O(n2 log 4 m + t2(n) log 3 m), with probability at least 1 − 1 

> m

.142 Chapter 7 

# Open Problems 

In this chapter, we highlight three compelling open directions that naturally arise from our study of closest fair clustering. These questions aim to deepen our understanding of fairness in clustering under different structural and algorithmic constraints. 

# 7.1 Improving the Approximation Factor for Multiple Colors 

In Theorem 6 and Theorem 7, we established algorithms for finding an α-close fair clustering where the approximation factor α depends polynomially on the number of color groups |χ|. While these results provide the first non-trivial guarantees for the multi-color setting, the dependence on |χ| can be undesirable—particularly when |χ| is large or comparable to the number of vertices |V |.An intriguing open direction is to design algorithms whose approximation factor is independent of |χ|, that is, to obtain a constant-factor approximation for the closest fair clustering problem. Achieving such a result would represent a significant conceptual and technical advancement, as it would eliminate the combinatorial dependence on the number of protected groups. Furthermore, as discussed in Chapter 5, a constant-factor approximation for the closest fair clustering problem would immediately imply constant-factor approximations for the fair correlation clustering and fair consensus clustering problems. This connection underscores the broader impact of improving the approximation factor in this setting. 

Question 7.1 . Given a clustering C on a vertex set V , where V is partitioned into disjoint color groups χ = {c1, . . . , c d}, can we design an algorithm that computes an O(1) -close fair clustering F

to C, independent of the number of colors d?

# 7.2 Extending to Alternative Fairness Notions 

Several alternative definitions of fairness have been explored in the clustering literature, each mo-tivated by different application scenarios and ethical considerations. One notable example is due to Ahmadian, Epasto, Kumar and Mahdian [AEK +20], where each color ci is associated with a parameter σi ∈ (0 , 1) . In their formulation, a clustering F is said to be fair if for every cluster 

F ∈ F we have ci(F ) ≤ σi|F | for all i, recall ci(F ) denotes the number of vertices of color ci in F .This definition allows for flexible upper bounds on group representation rather than enforcing strict proportionality, thereby offering a more permissive and context-sensitive notion of fairness. 143 We refer to such definitions collectively as relaxed notions of fairness . For a given clustering C,we define F∗C to be the closest relaxed fair clustering if 

dist( C, F∗C ) ≤ dist( C, F)

for all clusterings F that satisfy any relaxed fairness criterion. While our results in previous sections address proportional fairness, it remains an intriguing question whether similar approximation guarantees can be achieved for these relaxed notions. This leads to the following open problem. 

Question 7.2 . Given a clustering C on a vertex set V partitioned into disjoint color groups χ =

{c1, . . . , c d}, can we design an approximation algorithm to compute the closest relaxed fair clustering 

F to C?

# 7.3 Handling Overlapping Subgroups 

Fairness considerations in clustering often assume that the underlying demographic or protected groups form a disjoint partition of the dataset. However, in many real-world scenarios, individuals may belong to multiple groups simultaneously (for example, defined by intersections of gender, race, and age). This motivates the study of overlapping subgroup fairness , where the protected groups 

χ = {c1, . . . , c d} are not disjoint. Ahmadian and Negahbani [AN23] studied this setting in the context of the fair correlation clustering problem. Their fairness definition is same as Ahmadian, Epasto, Kumar, and Mah-dian [AEK +20], where each color ci is associated with a parameter σi ∈ (0 , 1) , and a clustering F

is said to be fair if for every cluster F ∈ F we have ci(F ) ≤ σi|F | for all i.Ahmadian and Negahbani provided a bicriteria constant-factor approximation for the fair cor-relation clustering problem under this definition. Here, “bicriteria” means that fairness constraints are allowed to be slightly violated in some clusters, i.e., 

ci(F ) ≤ (1 + ε) σi|F |

for some small ε ∈ (0 , 1) .A natural open question is whether similar bicriteria or exact guarantees can be achieved for the closest fair clustering problem under overlapping subgroup fairness. This would imply approx-imation for the fair consensus clustering problem. 

Question 7.3 . Given a clustering C on a vertex set V , where the color groups χ = {c1, . . . , c d} may overlap (i.e., each vertex may belong to multiple protected groups), can we develop an approximation algorithm to find the closest relaxed fair clustering F to C?144 145 Chapter 8 

# Appendix (Pseudocodes) 

# 8.1 Pseudocode of the algorithm AlgoforGeneral 

Algorithm 4: AlgoforGeneral (C)

Data: Input set of clusters C, in each Ci ∈ C the surplus of Ci, s(Ci) is within 0 < s(Ci) < p 

Result: A set of clusters T , such that in each cluster Ti ∈ T the number of blue vertices is a multiple of p. 

> 1

cut , merge , newcut , T cm ← ∅ 

> 2

for Ci ∈ C do  

> 3

if s(Ci) = 0 then add Ci to the set newcut  

> 45

else if s(Ci) < p/ 2 then  

> 6

add Ci to the set cut  

> 7

else  

> 8

add Ci to the set merge  

> 9

Sort the clusters in Ck ∈ merge based on their (κ(Ck) − μ(Ck)) in non-increasing order  

> 10

while cut ̸ = ∅ and merge ̸ = ∅ do  

> 11

for Ci ∈ cut do  

> 12

for Cj ∈ merge do  

> 13

Let, k = min (s(Ci), d(Cj )) . 

> 14

cut a set of k blue vertices from Ci and add to Cj 

> 15

if k = s(Ci) then  

> 16

cut = cut \ { Ci}. 

> 17

newcut = newcut ∪ Ci 

> 18

if k = d(Cj ) then  

> 19

merge = merge \ { Cj }. 

> 20

T cm = T cm ∪ Cj 

> 21

if cut = ∅ then  

> 22

return T cm ∪ AlgoforMerge (newcut , merge ) 

> 23

else  

> 24

return T cm ∪ newcut ∪ AlgoforCut (cut )

146 8.2 Pseudocode of the algorithm AlgoforMerge 

Algorithm 5: AlgoforMerge (newcut , merge ′)

Data: Two clustering newcut and merge ′ such that for all clusters Ci ∈ newcut we have p | | blue (Ci) | and for clusters Cj ∈ merge ′ we have s(Cj ) > p/ 2 respectively. In merge ′, the clusters Cj ∈ merge ′ are sorted based on their (κ(Cj ) − μ(Cj )) 

Result: A clustering T , such that for all clusters Ti ∈ T , p | blue (Ti). 

> 1

W ← P  

> Cj∈merge ′

d(Cj ) 

> 2

for Cℓ ∈ (newcut ∪ merge ′) do  

> 3

Initialize a variable vk to 0 

> 4

while W̸ = 0 do  

> 5

Take the cluster Cℓ ∈ (newcut ∪ merge ′) for which cost (Wm,v m ) is minimum 

// cost (Wm,v m ) = κvk (Cℓ) if vk ≥ 1, for vk = 0 cost (Wm,v m ) = κ0(Cℓ) − μ(Cℓ) 

> 6

while size (Wm,v m )̸ = 0 do 

// size (Wm,v m ) is the size vkth subset of Cℓ 

> 7

for Cj ∈ merge ′ do  

> 8

γ = min( d(Cj ), size (Wm,v m ))  

> 9

cut γ many blue vertices from Cℓ and merge to Cj 

> 10

if γ = d(Cj ) then  

> 11

size (Wm,v m ) = size (Wm,v m ) − γ 

> 12

if γ = size (Wm,v m )) then  

> 13

d(Cj ) = d(Cj ) − γ 

> 14

W = W − p 

> 15

vk = vk + 1  

> 16

for Cj ∈ merge ′ do  

> 17

if d(Cj ) = 0 then  

> 18

update merge ′ = merge ′ \ { Cj } 

> 19

return T = newcut ∪ merge ′

147 8.3 Pseudocode of the algorithm AlgoforCut 

Algorithm 6: AlgoforCut (cut ′)

Data: Set of clusters cut ′, in each cluster Di ∈ cut ′ the surplus of Di , s(Di ) ≤ p/ 2.

Result: Set of clusters T c, such that in each cluster Ti ∈ T c the number of blue vertices is a multiple of p. 

> 1

ExtraSum = P s(Ci) 

> 2

m = ExtraSum p 

> 3

Initialize m many sets E1, E 2, . . . E m to ∅

// m many extra clusters  

> 4

Initialize m many variables ℓ1, ℓ 2, . . . ℓ n to p

// leftover space of extra clusters  

> 5

Boolean f lag = 0  

> 6

for Di ∈ cut ′ do  

> 7

for j = 1 to n do  

> 8

Add k = min (ℓj , s(Di )) many blue vertices from Di to the cluster Ej 

> 9

ℓj = ℓj − k 

> 10

return cut ′ ∪ { E1, E 2, . . . , E m}

148 8.4 Pseudocode of the algorithm MakeClustersFair 

Algorithm 7: MakeClustersFair (T )

Data: a pdc T .

Result: a fair clustering F. 

> 1

BlueHeavy , RedHeavy , F ← ∅ 

> 2

for Ti ∈ T do  

> 3

if |blue (Ti) | < p |red (Ti) | then  

> 4

add Ti to the set RedHeavy  

> 5

else if |blue (Ti) | > p |red (Ti) | then  

> 6

add Ti to the set BlueHeavy  

> 7

for Ti ∈ RedHeavy do  

> 8

for Tj ∈ BlueHeavy do  

> 9

Let k = min( |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti) |

p , |blue (Tj ) |

p − | red (Tj ) |) 

> 10

Move k red vertices from Ti to Tj 

> 11

if k = |red (Ti) | − |blue (Ti) |

p then  

> 12

RedHeavy = RedHeavy \ { Ti} 

> 13

F = F ∪ { Ti} 

> 14

if k = |blue (Tj ) |

p − | red (Tj ) | then  

> 15

BlueHeavy = BlueHeavy \ { Tj } 

> 16

F = F ∪ { Tj } 

> 17

return F

149 8.5 Pseudocode of the algorithm fairpower-of-two 

Algorithm 8: fairpower-of-two (C)

Input: Clustering C

Output: A fair clustering Ffpt  

> 1

Let, N 0 = {N 01 , N 02 , . . . , N 0 

> ℓ

} = C. 

> 2

for i ← 1 to log |χ| do  

> 3

N i = N i−1 

> 4

j ← 1 

> 5

while j̸ = |χ|/2i do  

> 6

Sj , S j+1 ← ∅ 

> 7

foreach N ia ∈ N i do  

> 8

N ia ← N ia \ T ja 

> 9

if |Bij (N ia)| ≥ | Bij+1 (N ia)| then  

> 10

Sj ← Sj ∪ T ja 

> 11

else  

> 12

Sj+1 ← Sj+1 ∪ T ja 

> 13

N i = N i ∪ multi-GM (Sj , S j+1 ) 

> 14

j ← j + 2 i. 

> 15

return N log |χ|

150 8.6 Pseudocode of the algorithm multi-gm 

Algorithm 9: multi-GM (Set1 , Set2 )

Input: Two sets Set1 , Set2 of subsets of V , from blocks Bij and Bij+1 respectively 

Output: A set Fair of fair merged vertex sets  

> 1

Fair ← ∅ 

> 2

while Set1 ̸ = ∅ and Set2 ̸ = ∅ do  

> 3

Let S1 ∈ Set1  

> 4

Let S2 ∈ Set2  

> 5

if |S1| ≥ | S2| then  

> 6

Let S ⊆ S1 such that |S| = |S2| and S contains equal number of vertices of each color in Bij . 

> 7

Fair ← Fair ∪{ S ∪ S2} 

> 8

S1 ← S1 \ S 

> 9

Set2 ← Set2 \{ S2} 

> 10

if S1 = ∅ then  

> 11

Set1 ← Set1 \{ S1} 

> 12

else  

> 13

Let S ⊆ S2 such that |S| = |S1| and S contains equal number of vertices of each color in Bij+1  

> 14

Fair ← Fair ∪{ S ∪ S1} 

> 15

S2 ← S2 \ S 

> 16

Set1 ← Set1 \{ S1} 

> 17

if S2 = ∅ then  

> 18

Set2 ← Set2 \{ S2} 

> 19

return Fair 

151 8.7 Pseudocode of the algorithm make-pdc-fair 

Algorithm 10: make-pdc-fair 

Input: Initial clustering I = F0, color set ζ = {z1, . . . , z r}, target proportions (p1 : · · · : pr)

For each cluster Ij ∈ I we have zk(Ij ) is a multiple of pk.

Output: Clustering F where each cluster satisfies the global color ratio  

> 1

Let T ← ⌈ log 2 r⌉ 

> 2

Initialize blocks B0 

> j

← { zj } for all j ∈ [r] 

> 3

Set F0 ← I  

> 4

for t ← 1 to T do // Iterate through block levels  

> 5

Merge adjacent blocks from level t − 1 to form {Bt

> 1

, B t

> 2

, . . . } 

> 6

Let mt−1 ← number of blocks at iteration t − 1 

> 7

if mt−1 is odd then  

> 8

Copy the last block as-is: Bt 

> ⌈#Bt−1/2⌉

← Bt−1 

> mt−1
> 9

Initialize Ft ← ∅ 

> 10

foreach F ∈ F t−1 do // Iterate through clusters  

> 11

foreach Bti = Bt−12i−1 ∪ Bt−12i do // Iterate through blocks  

> 12

Let A = Bt−12i−1 = {za1 , . . . , z as } 

> 13

Let B = Bt−12i = {zb1 , . . . , z bu } 

> 14

Compute scaling factors:  

> 15

x ← min j∈[s]

 zaj (F )

> paj

 

> 16

y ← min k∈[u]

 zbk (F )

> pbk

 

> 17

if x > y then // Case 1: need to merge  

> 18

foreach k ∈ [u] do  

> 19

Merge pbk · (x − y) vertices of color zbk into F 

> 20

else if x < y then // Case 2: need to cut  

> 21

foreach k ∈ [u] do  

> 22

Cut pbk · (y − x) vertices of color zbk from F 

> 23

Add updated cluster F to Ft 

> 24

return FT

152 153 8.8 Pseudocode of the algorithm create-pdc 

Algorithm 11: create-pdc 

Input: Clustering C, colors χ = {c1, . . . , c t}, and ratios p1 : p2 : · · · : pt

Output: p-divisible clustering M 

> 1

foreach cj ∈ χ do  

> 2

Create σj /p j empty clusters: extra_clusters = {P1, P 2, . . . , P σj /p j }; 

> 3

Initialize CUT ← ∅, MERGE ← ∅; 

> 4

foreach Ci ∈ C do  

> 5

if |σ(Ci, c j )| ≤ pj /2 then CUT ← CUT ∪ { Ci} ; 

> 6

else MERGE ← MERGE ∪ { Ci} ; 

> 7

while CUT ̸ = ∅ do  

> 8

Pick and remove Ck ∈ CUT ; 

> 9

Remove surplus: Ck ← Dk \ σ(Ck, c j ); 

> 10

if MERGE ̸ = ∅ then  

> 11

while σ(Ck, c j )̸ = ∅ do  

> 12

foreach Cℓ ∈ MERGE do  

> 13

T ← min( |σ(Ck, c j )|, |δ(Cℓ, c j )|)-sized subset of σ(Ck, c j ); 

> 14

Cℓ ← Cℓ ∪ T ; 

> 15

σ(Ck, c j ) ← σ(Ck, c j ) \ T ; 

> 16

if cj (Cℓ) is a multiple of pj then  

> 17

MERGE ← MERGE \ { Cℓ}; 

> 18

else  

> 19

while σ(Ck, c j )̸ = ∅ do  

> 20

foreach Pm ∈ extra_clusters do  

> 21

Q ← subset of size min( pj , |σ(Ck, c j )|, p j − | Pm|); 

> 22

Pm ← Pm ∪ Q; 

> 23

σ(Ck, c j ) ← σ(Ck, c j ) \ Q; 

> 24

if |Pm| = pj then  

> 25

extra_clusters ← extra_clusters \ { Pm}; 

> 26

while MERGE ̸ = ∅ do  

> 27

Pick Ck ∈ cut ∪ merge with minimum κj (Ck) − μj (Dk); 

> 28

Remove surplus: Ck ← Ck \ σ(Ck, c j ); 

> 29

while σ(Dk, c j )̸ = ∅ do  

> 30

foreach Cℓ ∈ MERGE do  

> 31

T ← min( |σ(Ck, c j )|, |δ(Cℓ, c j )|)-sized subset;  

> 32

Cℓ ← Cℓ ∪ T ; 

> 33

σ(Ck, c j ) ← σ(Ck, c j ) \ T ; 

> 34

if cj (Cℓ) is a multiple of pj then  

> 35

MERGE ← MERGE \ { Cℓ}; 

> 36

return M composed of updated C and filled extra_clusters ;154 8.9 Pseudocode of algo-fair-con-stream 

Algorithm 12: algo-fair-con-stream 

Input : Stream of triples (( u, v ), j, b ); parameters n, m, ε ∈ (0 , 15 ]

Output: A fair consensus clustering F. 

> 1

Sampled indices and memory structures:  

> 2

Draw s ← ⌈ log m⌉ indices J ← { j1, . . . , j s} ⊆ [m] uniformly at random.  

> 3

Let M1 ← empty store (hash from index → list of triples).  

> 4

Set t ← ⌈ ε−2 log m⌉ and draw K ← { k1, . . . , k t} ⊆ [m] uniformly at random.  

> 5

Let M2 ← empty store (hash from index → list of triples).  

> 6

Single-pass streaming phase:  

> 7

foreach triple (( u, v ), j, b ) arriving in the stream do  

> 8

if j ∈ J then  

> 9

append (( u, v ), b ) to M1[j] 

> 10

if j ∈ K then  

> 11

append (( u, v ), b ) to M2[j] 

> 12

Post-stream reconstruction:  

> 13

foreach j ∈ J do  

> 14

initialize a fresh union–find UF j on V 

> 15

foreach (( u, v ), b ) ∈ M1[j] do  

> 16

if b = 0 then  

> 17

union u and v in UF j 

> 18

Cj ← BuildClustersFromUF( UF j ) // extract clusters from union–find  

> 19

Let CJ ← {C j1 , . . . , Cjs }. 

> 20

Generate fair candidate set:  

> 21

eF ← find-candidates( CJ ) // uses α-close fair clustering algorithm  

> 22

Build W from M2: 

> 23

foreach k ∈ K do  

> 24

initialize a fresh union–find UF k on V 

> 25

foreach (( u, v ), b ) ∈ M2[k] do  

> 26

if b = 0 then  

> 27

union u and v in UF k 

> 28

Ck ← BuildClustersFromUF( UF k) 

> 29

W ← {C k1 , . . . , Ckt }. 

> 30

Select the best fair clustering on the sampled store 2: 

> 31

F ← ArgMin F′∈ eF

X

> Ci∈W

dist( Ci, F′) 

> 32

return F

155 Bibliography 

[AB18] Amir Abboud and Greg Bodwin. Reachability preservers: new extremal bounds and approximation algorithms. In SODA , 2018. [ACG +15] KookJin Ahn, Graham Cormode, Sudipto Guha, Andrew McGregor, and Anthony Wirth. Correlation clustering in data streams. In ICML , 2015. [ACN08] Nir Ailon, Moses Charikar, and Alantha Newman. Aggregating inconsistent informa-tion: ranking and clustering. Journal of the ACM , 2008. [ADG +13] Ittai Abraham, Daniel Delling, Andrew V. Goldberg, and Renato F. Werneck. Alter-native routes in road networks. ACM Journal of Experimental Algorithmics , 2013. [AEK +20] Sara Ahmadian, Alessandro Epasto, Ravi Kumar, and Mohammad Mahdian. Fair correlation clustering. In ICML , 2020. [AGH +24] Sara Ahmadian, Sreenivas Gollapudi, Gregory Hutchins, Kostas Kollias, and Xizhi Tan. Extracting small subgraphs in road networks. In WWW , 2024. [AGK +04] Vineet Arya, Naveen Garg, Rohit Khandekar, Adam Meyerson, Kamesh Munagala, and Vinayaka Pandit. Local search heuristics for k-median and facility location prob-lems. SIAM Journal on Computing , 2004. [AGS +20] Saba Ahmadi, Sainyam Galhotra, Barna Saha, and Roy Schwartz. Fair correlation clustering. arXiv:2002.03508 , 2020. [AKP +95] Noga Alon, Richard M. Karp, David Peleg, and Douglas West. A graph-theoretic game and its application to the k-server problem. SIAM Journal on Computing , 1995. [AN23] Sara Ahmadian and Maryam Negahbani. Improved approximation for fair correlation clustering. In AISTATS , 2023. [Awe83] Baruch Awerbuch. Complexity of network synchronization. In FOCS , 1983. [BBC02] Nikhil Bansal, Avrim Blum, and Shuchi Chawla. Correlation clustering. In FOCS ,2002. [BBC04] Nikhil Bansal, Avrim Blum, and Shuchi Chawla. Correlation clustering. Machine Learning , 2004. [BBD +02] Brian Babcock, Shivnath Babu, Mayur Datar, Rajeev Motwani, and Jennifer Widom. Models and issues in data stream systems. In PODS , 2002. [BCC +19] Surender Baswana, Shreejit Ray Chaudhury, Keerti Choudhary, and Shahbaz Khan. Dynamic dfs in undirected graphs: breaking the o(m) barrier. SIAM Journal on Com-puting , 2019. 156 [BCF +19] Suman Bera, Deeparnab Chakrabarty, Nicolas Flores, and Maryam Negahbani. Fair algorithms for clustering. In NeurIPS , 2019. [BCJ +22] Vladimir Braverman, Vincent Cohen-Addad, H-C Shaofeng Jiang, Robert Krauthgamer, Chris Schwiegelshohn, Mads Bech Toftrup, and Xuan Wu. The power of uniform sampling for coresets. In FOCS , 2022. [BCM +22] Soheil Behnezhad, Moses Charikar, Weiyun Ma, and Li-Yang Tan. Almost 3-approximate correlation clustering in constant rounds. In FOCS , 2022. [BCM +23] Soheil Behnezhad, Moses Charikar, Weiyun Ma, and Li-Yang Tan. Single-pass stream-ing algorithms for correlation clustering. In SODA , 2023. [BCR16] Surender Baswana, Keerti Choudhary, and Liam Roditty. Fault-tolerant subgraph for single-source reachability: generic and optimal. In STOC , 2016. [BDG +22] Suman K Bera, Syamantak Das, Sainyam Galhotra, and Sagar Sudhir Kale. Fair k-center clustering in mapreduce and streaming settings. In WWW , 2022. [BFL +16] Vladimir Braverman, Dan Feldman, Harry Lang, Adiel Statman, and Samson Zhou. New frameworks for offline and streaming coreset constructions. arXiv:1612.00889 ,2016. [BFL +19] Vladimir Braverman, Dan Feldman, Harry Lang, and Daniela Rus. Streaming coreset constructions for m-estimators. In APPROX/RANDOM , 2019. [BGL +16] Davide Bilò, Fabrizio Grandoni, Stefano Leucci, and Guido Proietti. Improved purely additive fault-tolerant spanners. In ESA , 2016. [BIO +19] Arturs Backurs, Piotr Indyk, Krzysztof Onak, Baruch Schieber, Ali Vakilian, and Tal Wagner. Scalable fair clustering. In ICML , 2019. [BIV +19] Arturs Backurs, Piotr Indyk, Ali Vakilian, and Tal Wagner. Scalable fair clustering. In ICML , 2019. [BK13] Surender Baswana and Neelesh Khanna. Approximate shortest paths avoiding a failed vertex: near-optimal data structures for undirected unweighted graphs. Algorithmica ,2013. [BK96] András A. Benczúr and David R. Karger. Approximating s-t minimum cuts in ˜O(n2)

time. In STOC , 1996. [BL25] Greg Bodwin and Tuong Le. Improved online reachability preservers. In SODA , 2025. [BLT12] Gerth Stølting Brodal, George Lagogiannis, and Robert E Tarjan. Strict fibonacci heaps. In STOC , 2012. [BN20] Shubhashis Bhowmick and Brian Mac Namee. Consensus clustering for data integra-tion. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , 2020. [Bod17] Greg Bodwin. Linear size distance preservers. In SODA , 2017. [Bod22] Greg Bodwin. A note on distance-preserving graph sparsification. Information Pro-cessing Letters , 2022. [BS07] Surender Baswana and Sandeep Sen. A simple linear time algorithm for computing a 

(2 k − 1) -spanner of O(n1+1 /k ) size in weighted graphs. In ICALP , 2007. 157 [BS80] Jon Louis Bentley and James B Saxe. Decomposable searching problems i. static-to-dynamic transformation. Journal of Algorithms , 1980. [BVD +08] Paola Bonizzoni, Gianluca Della Vedova, Riccardo Dondi, and Tao Jiang. On the approximation of correlation clustering and consensus clustering. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 2008. [CC20] Diptarka Chakraborty and Keerti Choudhary. New extremal bounds for reachability and strong-connectivity preservers under failures. In ICALP , 2020. [CCC22] Diptarka Chakraborty, Kushagra Chatterjee, and Keerti Choudhary. Pairwise reach-ability oracles and preservers under failures. In ICALP , 2022. [CCD +25] Diptarka Chakraborty, Kushagra Chatterjee, Debarati Das, Tien Long Nguyen, and Romina Nobahari. Towards fair representation: clustering and consensus. In COLT ,2025. [CCD +26a] Diptarka Chakraborty, Kushagra Chatterjee, Debarati Das, and Tien-Long Nguyen. A generic framework for fair consensus clustering in streams. In AAMAS , 2026. [CCD +26b] Diptarka Chakraborty, Kushagra Chatterjee, Debarati Das, and Tien-Long Nguyen. Generalizing fair clustering to multiple groups: algorithms and applications. In AAAI ,2026. [CCL +25] Nairen Cao, Vincent Cohen-Addad, Euiwoong Lee, Shi Li, David Rasmussen Lolck, Alantha Newman, Mikkel Thorup, Lukas Vogl, Shuyi Yan, and Hanwen Zhang. Static to dynamic correlation clustering. arXiv:2504.12060 , 2025. [CDC +22] Rachit Chhaya, Anirban Dasgupta, Jayesh Choudhari, and Supratim Shit. On coresets for fair regression and individually fair clustering. In AISTATS , 2022. [CDG06] T-H Hubert Chan, Michael Dinitz, and Anupam Gupta. Spanners with slack. In ESA ,2006. [CDK +22] Diptarka Chakraborty, Syamantak Das, Arindam Khan, and Aditya Subramanian. Fair rank aggregation. In NeurIPS , 2022. [CE06] Don Coppersmith and Michael Elkin. Sparse sourcewise and pairwise distance pre-servers. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics , 2006. [CFL +19] Xingyu Chen, Brandon Fain, Liang Lyu, and Kamesh Munagala. Proportionally fair clustering. In ICML , 2019. [CGT +99] Moses Charikar, Sudipto Guha, Éva Tardos, and David B. Shmoys. A constant-factor approximation algorithm for the k-median problem. In STOC , 1999. [CGW05] Moses Charikar, Venkatesan Guruswami, and Anthony Wirth. Clustering with quali-tative information. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 2005. [Che13] Shiri Chechik. Fault-tolerant compact routing schemes for general graphs. Information and Computation , 2013. [Cho16] Keerti Choudhary. An optimal dual fault-tolerant reachability oracle. In ICALP , 2016. [CJY +25] Vincent Cohen-Addad, Shaofeng H-C Jiang, Qiaoyuan Yang, Yubo Zhang, and Samson Zhou. Fair clustering in the sliding window model. In ICLR , 2025. 158 [CKL +17] Flavio Chierichetti, Ravi Kumar, Silvio Lattanzi, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Fair clus-tering through fairlets. In NeurIPS , 2017. [CLM +21] Vincent Cohen-Addad, Silvio Lattanzi, Slobodan Mitrović, Jakub Tarnawski, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Correlation clustering in constant many parallel rounds. In ICML ,2021. [CLM +22] Vincent Cohen-Addad, Silvio Lattanzi, Slobodan Mitrović, Jakub Tarnawski, and Sergei Vassilvitskii. Online and consistent correlation clustering. In ICML , 2022. [CLP +09] Shiri Chechik, Michael Langberg, David Peleg, and Liam Roditty. Fault-tolerant span-ners for general graphs. In STOC , 2009. [CLP +10] Shiri Chechik, Michael Langberg, David Peleg, and Liam Roditty. F-sensitivity dis-tance oracles and routing schemes. In ESA , 2010. [CLP +24] Vincent Cohen-Addad, David Rasmussen Lolck, Marcin Pilipczuk, Mikkel Thorup, Shuyi Yan, and Hanwen Zhang. Combinatorial correlation clustering. In STOC , 2024. [CM23] Sayak Chakrabarty and Konstantin Makarychev. Single-pass pivot algorithm for cor-relation clustering. keep it simple! In NeurIPS , 2023. [CMS +18] Shuchi Chawla, Konstantin Makarychev, Tselil Schramm, and Grigory Yaroslavtsev. Near optimal lp rounding algorithm for correlation clustering on complete and com-plete k-partite graphs. Journal of the ACM , 2018. [COP03] Moses Charikar, Liadan O’Callaghan, and Rina Panigrahy. Better streaming algo-rithms for clustering problems. In STOC , 2003. [DEF +06] Erik D Demaine, Dotan Emanuel, Amos Fiat, and Nicole Immorlica. Correlation clus-tering in general weighted graphs. Theoretical Computer Science , 2006. [DGP +17] Daniel Delling, Andrew V. Goldberg, Thomas Pajor, and Renato F. Werneck. Cus-tomizable route planning in road networks. Transportation Science , 2017. [Din07] Michael Dinitz. Compact routing with slack. In PODC , 2007. [DJP +97] Elias Dahlhaus, David S. Johnson, Christos H. Papadimitriou, Paul D. Seymour, and Mihalis Yannakakis. The complexity of multiway cuts. In ICALP , 1997. [DK11] Michael Dinitz and Robert Krauthgamer. Fault-tolerant spanners: better and simpler. In PODC , 2011. [DK25] Debarati Das and Amit Kumar. Breaking the two approximation barrier for various consensus clustering problems. In SODA , 2025. [DP09] Ran Duan and Seth Pettie. Dual-failure distance and connectivity oracles. In SODA ,2009. [DP10] Ran Duan and Seth Pettie. Connectivity oracles for failure-prone graphs. In STOC ,2010. [DP17] Ran Duan and Seth Pettie. Connectivity oracles for graphs subject to vertex failures. In SODA , 2017. [DTC +08] Camil Demetrescu, Mikkel Thorup, Rezaul Alam Chowdhury, and Vijaya Ramachan-dran. Oracles for distances avoiding a failed node or link. SIAM Journal on Computing ,2008. 159 [EBT +20] Seyed Esmaeili, Brian Brubach, Leonidas Tsepenekas, and John Dickerson. Probabilis-tic fair clustering. In NeurIPS , 2020. [EP05] Michael Elkin and David Peleg. Approximating k-spanner problems for k > 2. Theo-retical Computer Science , 2005. [FL11] Dan Feldman and Michael Langberg. A unified framework for approximating and clustering data. In STOC , 2011. [FS04a] Vladimir Filkov and Steven Skiena. Heterogeneous data integration with the consensus clustering formalism. In DILS , 2004. [FS04b] Vladimir Filkov and Steven Skiena. Integrating microarray data by consensus cluster-ing. International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools , 2004. [GF08] Andrey Goder and Vladimir Filkov. Consensus clustering algorithms: comparison and refinement. In ALENEX , 2008. [GJ75] Michael R Garey and David S Johnson. Complexity results for multiprocessor schedul-ing under resource constraints. SIAM Journal on Computing , 1975. [GLJ +26] Longkun Guo, Zeyu Lin, Chaoqi Jia, and Chao Chen. Improved streaming algorithm for fair k-center clustering. In AAAI , 2026. [GLQ21] Elena Grigorescu, Young-San Lin, and Kent Quanrud. Online directed spanners and steiner forests. In APPROX/RANDOM , 2021. [Gon85] Teofilo F. Gonzalez. Clustering to minimize the maximum intercluster distance. The-oretical Computer Science , 1985. [GSS +08] Robert Geisberger, Peter Sanders, Dominik Schultes, and Daniel Delling. Contraction hierarchies: faster and simpler hierarchical routing in road networks. In WEA , 2008. [HJV19] Lingxiao Huang, Shaofeng Jiang, and Nisheeth Vishnoi. Coresets for clustering with fairness constraints. In NeurIPS , 2019. [HM04] Sariel Har-Peled and Soham Mazumdar. On coresets for k-means and k-median clus-tering and their applications to approximate nearest neighbor and clustering in data streams. In STOC , 2004. [Ind01] Piotr Indyk. High-dimensional computational geometry . 2001. [Ind99] Piotr Indyk. Sublinear time algorithms for metric space problems. In STOC , 1999. [JV01] Kamal Jain and Vijay V. Vazirani. Approximation algorithms for metric facility loca-tion and k-median problems using the primal-dual schema and lagrangian relaxation. 

Journal of the ACM , 2001. [KM86] Mirko Křivánek and Jaroslav Morávek. Np-hard problems in hierarchical-tree cluster-ing. Acta Informatica , 1986. [KRX +07] Goran Konjevod, Andrea Werneck Richa, Donglin Xia, and Hai Yu. Compact routing with slack in low doubling dimension. In PODC , 2007. [LF12] Andrea Lancichinetti and Santo Fortunato. Consensus clustering in complex networks. 

Scientific Reports , 2012. [LGJ24] Zeyu Lin, Longkun Guo, and Chaoqi Jia. Streaming fair k-center clustering over mas-sive dataset with performance guarantee. In PAKDD , 2024. 160 [MT23] Sepideh Mahabadi and Stojan Trajanovski. Core-sets for fair and diverse data sum-marization. In NeurIPS , 2023. [MTM +03] Stefano Monti, Pablo Tamayo, Jill Mesirov, and Todd Golub. Consensus clustering: a resampling-based method for class discovery and visualization of gene expression microarray data. Machine Learning , 2003. [Mut05] Shanmugavelayutham Muthukrishnan. Data streams: algorithms and applications. 

Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science , 2005. [NI92] Hiroshi Nagamochi and Toshihide Ibaraki. A linear-time algorithm for finding a sparse k-connected spanning subgraph of a k-connected graph. Algorithmica , 1992. [Par15] Merav Parter. Dual failure resilient bfs structure. In PODC , 2015. [PP13] Merav Parter and David Peleg. Sparse fault-tolerant bfs trees. In ESA , 2013. [PP14] Merav Parter and David Peleg. Fault-tolerant approximate bfs structures. In SODA ,2014. [PS89] David Peleg and Alejandro A. Schäffer. Graph spanners. Journal of Graph Theory ,1989. [PT07] Mihai Pătras , cu and Mikkel Thorup. Planning for fast connectivity updates. In FOCS ,2007. [RS18] Clemens Rösner and Melanie Schmidt. Privacy preserving clustering with constraints. In ICALP , 2018. [RVF +14] Guy Rosman, Mikhail Volkov, Danny Feldman, John W Fisher, and Daniela Rus. Coresets for k-segmentation of streaming data. In NeurIPS , 2014. [SS11] Daniel A. Spielman and Nikhil Srivastava. Graph sparsification by effective resistances. 

SIAM Journal on Computing , 2011. [SSS19] Melanie Schmidt, Chris Schwiegelshohn, and Christian Sohler. Fair coresets and streaming algorithms for fair k-means. In WAOA , 2019. [Swa04] Chaitanya Swamy. Correlation clustering: maximizing agreements via semidefinite programming. In SODA , 2004. [TJP03] Alexander Topchy, Anil K Jain, and William Punch. Combining multiple weak clus-terings. In ICDM , 2003. [TZ05] Mikkel Thorup and Uri Zwick. Approximate distance oracles. Journal of the ACM ,2005. [VRV12] Konstantin Voevodski, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Find-ing consistent clusters in data streams. In ICML , 2012. [WIS +22] Dong Wei, Md Mouinul Islam, Baruch Schieber, and Senjuti Basu Roy. Rank aggre-gation with proportionate fairness. In SIGMOD , 2022. [WLX +14] Junjie Wu, Hongfu Liu, Hui Xiong, Jie Cao, and Jian Chen. K-means-based consensus clustering: a unified view. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering ,2014. 161 [XDS +24] Zikai Xiong, Niccolò Dalmasso, Shubham Sharma, Freddy Lecue, Daniele Maga-zzeni, Vamsi Potluru, Tucker Balch, and Manuela Veloso. Fair wasserstein coresets. In 

NeurIPS , 2024. 162