Title: Intent-Driven Computing: A Computational Model for Governed Autonomous Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.24036v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 00:05:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Intent-Driven Computing: A Computational Model for Governed Autonomous Systems 

Alan L. McCann 

Mashin, Inc. 

research@mashin.live 

May 2026 

Abstract 

Programming languages assume programs directly execute effects. When autonomous systems generate behavior dynamically, this assumption becomes problematic: there is no structural mediation point between deciding to act and acting. We define intent-driven computing : a programming model where programs produce intents (finite data values describing proposed actions) rather than directly executing effects. A governed runtime examines each intent against a decidable policy language, records every decision in a tamper-evident ledger, and only then realizes the effect. The language provides no alternative path to effects. The model does not decide arbitrary behavioral properties of programs (which Rice’s theorem shows is impossible). Instead, it constrains the language so that all effectful interaction is reified as finite intent values, shifting governance from the undecidable domain of program semantics to the decidable domain of intent data. This yields emergent properties: event sourcing by construction, governance simulation via intent replay, structural audit completeness, and improved human comprehensibility. We specify the model formally, implement it in a concrete language compiling to the BEAM virtual machine, and verify key properties in Rocq (454 theorems, 36 modules, zero admitted lemmas). Property-based testing (70,000+ random inputs, zero disagreements) validates that the implementation matches the specification. 

# 1 Introduction 

Consider an AI agent deployed to process customer refund requests at a financial services firm. The agent accesses customer email, a CRM system, a payment processing API, and internal policy documents. On a given day it processes 200 requests. The compliance team asks: for each refund the agent issued, can we prove that the agent was authorized to issue it, that it checked the policy, that it did not access records it was not entitled to see, and that the complete decision trail is independently verifiable? With common agent frameworks, the answer is generally no unless the framework is embedded in a separate enforcement substrate. The agent runs in Python or JavaScript. It has access to 

requests.post() , subprocess.run() , or equivalent ambient I/O capabilities. Guardrails check model outputs but not programmatic effects. API keys scope access but do not record why access was granted. Logs capture what happened but cannot prove completeness: there is no guarantee that every action produced a log entry, and the logs themselves are stored in infrastructure the auditor must trust. This paper argues that the problem is not insufficient tooling but an incorrect abstraction level. Traditional computing conflates two distinct concerns: the expression of desired actions and the 1

> arXiv:2605.24036v1 [cs.PL] 21 May 2026

realization of those actions as effects. When a human writes every line of code, this conflation is harmless. When autonomous systems generate behavior dynamically, it becomes structurally problematic. We propose intent-driven computing : a computational model that separates these concerns by construction. Programs produce intents , not effects. A governed runtime mediates every intent. The separation is not a policy layer or middleware; it is a property of the language semantics. Prior work has established the formal foundations: the structural gap between expressiveness and governance boundaries McCann [2026d], mechanized proofs of governance properties McCann [2026b], effect-transparent governance McCann [2026a], and certified purity McCann [2026c]. This paper contributes the unifying computational model and its emergent consequences. 

1.1 The Completeness Barrier 

Rice’s theorem Rice [1953] establishes that for any non-trivial semantic property P of programs in a Turing-complete language, the set of programs satisfying P is undecidable. “This agent only accesses approved APIs” is such a property. “This agent stays within its refund limit” is such a property. No behavioral analysis can be simultaneously sound, complete, and decidable for these properties over arbitrary programs. Current AI governance approaches accommodate this barrier by accepting incompleteness. Con-tent filters Rebedea et al. [2023] examine what models say, not what programs do. Guardrails Bai et al. [2022] wrap individual calls but cannot cover compositions. Runtime monitors Leucker and Schallhart [2009] observe effects after execution, when damage may already be done. Managed plat-forms provide scoped permissions but store audit data in vendor infrastructure, making independent verification impossible. We call this the accountability gap : the distance between what governance systems promise and what they can prove. The gap is not an engineering shortcoming. It is a mathematical consequence of representing governance as a behavioral property of programs in a Turing-complete language. 

1.2 The Abstraction Shift 

Intent-driven computing addresses the accountability gap by changing the abstraction level. Programs in an intent-driven language cannot cause effects. They can only produce intents: finite, structured data representing proposed actions. A governance interpreter examines each intent against a decidable policy language, records the decision in a tamper-evident ledger, and either realizes the effect or denies the intent. No alternative effect path exists in the language semantics. The model does not attempt to decide arbitrary behavioral properties of programs (which Rice’s theorem shows is impossible). Instead, it constrains the language so that all effectful interaction is reified as finite intent values. Governance decisions are made over those values, using a decidable policy language, before realization. This is a change in the governance domain, not a workaround for undecidability. 

1.3 Contributions 

1. A formally specified programming model, presented as a small-step operational calculus with explicit governance mediation semantics, in which effectful computation is expressed as inspectable intent values and the only operational rule that realizes effects must first produce a governance decision and ledger event ( §2). 22. A precise account of how this model avoids reducing governance to an undecidable behavioral property: enforcement operates on finite intent values under a decidable policy language, not on program behavior ( §3). 3. An analysis of how intent-driven computing changes the programming experience: writing, reasoning, testing, debugging, and evolving autonomous systems ( §6). 4. A concrete implementation with mechanized proofs (454 Rocq theorems, zero admitted), perfor-mance measurements, and a case study ( §5, §7). 5. A comparative analysis situating the model within effect systems, capability-based security, event sourcing, monadic I/O, and desired-state systems ( §9). 6. A historical argument that intent-driven computing follows the pattern of prior abstraction shifts in computing ( §8). 

# 2 The Intent-Driven Computational Model 

2.1 Definitions 

Definition 2.1 (Intent) . An intent is a finite, structured data value i = ( action , target , params , context )representing a proposed effectful operation. Intents are values, not computations: they can be inspected, compared, serialized, and decided upon without executing them. 

Definition 2.2 (Effect) . An effect is the realization of an intent by the runtime: the actual execution of the proposed operation (e.g., sending an HTTP request, writing a file, invoking an external service). 

Definition 2.3 (Intent-Driven Program) . An intent-driven program is a computation that produces a sequence of intents [ i1, i 2, . . . , i n] but cannot directly execute effects. The program’s expressiveness for pure computation is unrestricted (Turing-complete). Its interaction with the external world is mediated entirely through intent production. 

Definition 2.4 (Governance Interpreter) . A governance interpreter G is a function that, given a policy set P, an intent i, and a runtime context c, produces a decision d ∈ { allow , deny , escalate }

and a decision record r:

G(P, i, c ) = ( d, r )The governance interpreter is total: every intent receives a decision. No intent bypasses the interpreter. We require the runtime context c used by governance predicates to be finite and serializable; policies over non-terminating or externally interactive context are outside the model. This constraint ensures that governance evaluation terminates and that context can be recorded for replay. 

Definition 2.5 (Intent-Driven Runtime) . An intent-driven runtime R processes a program’s intent sequence as follows. For each intent ik:1. G(P, i k, c k) = ( dk, r k)2. record (rk, L) — append rk to tamper-evident ledger 3. If dk = allow : realize (ik) = ek — execute effect 4. If dk = deny : no effect; program receives denial 5. If dk = escalate : suspend for external authorization 3Program (Layer 1 + 2)  

> Governance Interpreter
> Effect Realization
> Tamper-Evident Ledger
> intent allow
> record
> deny

Figure 1: Intent-driven execution flow. Programs produce intents. The governance interpreter mediates every intent, records the decision, and realizes allowed effects. No alternative path from program to effect exists in the language semantics. 

2.2 The Two-Layer Architecture 

Intent-driven programs operate in two layers: 

Layer 1: Pure Computation. General-purpose computation with no I/O capability. Programs can perform arithmetic, string processing, data transformation, pattern matching, control flow, and any other computation expressible in a Turing-complete language. This layer cannot produce effects because effect capabilities are structurally absent, not merely restricted. 

Layer 2: Governed Effects. All interaction with the external world occurs through intent production. When a program needs to send an email, read a file, invoke an API, or perform any effectful operation, it produces an intent. The governance interpreter mediates the intent before any effect occurs. This separation is enforced by the language semantics, not by runtime policy. Programs in Layer 1 cannot “escape” to ambient I/O because the language does not provide ambient I/O constructs. The only path to effects is through intent production, which is mediated by the governance interpreter. 

2.3 Core Calculus 

We define a small calculus for intent-driven execution. Terms, intents, decisions, and records: 

e ::= x | v | let x = e1 in e2 | if e1 then e2 else e3

| compute (e) | ask (a, t, p )

v ::= n | b | s | λx. e | intent (a, t, p )

i ::= Intent (action , target , params , context )

d ::= allow | deny | escalate 

r ::= record (i, d, Papplied , context , h prev )Configurations are triples ⟨e, P, L⟩ where P is a finite set of decidable predicates over intents and L is a sequence of decision records. 

2.4 Transition Rules 

Pure computation leaves the policy and ledger unchanged: 

σ τ

−→ σ′

⟨σ, P, L⟩ τ

−→ ⟨ σ′, P, L⟩ (Pure) 4Intent production invokes the governance interpreter: 

G(P, i, c ) = ( allow , r ) realize (i) = v

⟨ask (a, t, p ), P, L⟩ v

−→ ⟨ v, P, L · r⟩ (Allow) 

G(P, i, c ) = ( deny , r )

⟨ask (a, t, p ), P, L⟩ ⊥

−→ ⟨ denied , P, L · r⟩

(Deny) 

G(P, i, c ) = ( escalate , r )

⟨ask (a, t, p ), P, L⟩ wait 

−−→ ⟨ suspended , P, L · r⟩

(Escalate) Standard evaluation contexts E provide call-by-value reduction under let , if , and application. 

2.5 Theorems 

We state four named theorems over this calculus. Full proofs are mechanized in Rocq; we give proof sketches here. 

Theorem 2.6 (Mediation Soundness) . If a configuration ⟨e, P, L⟩ steps to ⟨e′, P, L′⟩ and an effect realization realize (i) = v occurs in this step, then G(P, i, c ) = ( allow , r ) was evaluated and r ∈ L ′.Proof sketch. By inspection of the transition rules: effect realization appears only in Allow ,which requires G to return allow and appends r to L. No other rule invokes realize . Mechanized: 

GovernanceMediation.v , Theorem mediation soundness .

Theorem 2.7 (Ledger Completeness) . Every transition from ⟨ask (. . . ), P, L⟩ appends exactly one record to L.Proof sketch. By case analysis: Allow , Deny , and Escalate each append exactly one r. These are the only rules whose premise matches ask . Mechanized: HashChainSpec.v .

Theorem 2.8 (Non-Bypass) . No derivation exists from a configuration ⟨e, P, L⟩ to a configuration containing a realized effect v = realize (i) except through the Allow rule. Proof sketch. realize appears only in the premise of Allow . Pure reduction rules do not invoke 

realize . Deny and Escalate do not invoke realize . Therefore realize can only be reached through 

Allow . Mechanized: GovernanceMediation.v , Theorem no unmediated effect .

Theorem 2.9 (Policy Decidability) . For any finite policy set P whose predicates are decidable over finite intents, G(P, i, c ) terminates. Proof sketch. P contains k predicates, each decidable (terminates on all inputs by assumption). 

G evaluates each predicate on ( i, c ) and combines results via a fixed strategy. Since k is finite and each evaluation terminates, G terminates. Mechanized: GovernanceMediation.v , Theorem 

governance mediation total .5Theorem Informal Claim Rocq Module             

> Mediation Soundness Effects imply prior allow GovernanceMediation.v
> Ledger Completeness Every ask appends a record HashChainSpec.v
> Non-Bypass No effect without Allow rule GovernanceMediation.v
> Policy Decidability Governance terminates GovernanceMediation.v
> Coterminous Boundaries Expr boundary = gov boundary CoterminousBoundary.v
> Composition Preservation Governance holds under nesting CompositionPreserves.v

Table 1: Theorem summary mapping formal results to informal claims and Rocq proof modules.        

> Program term
> eask (a, t, p )G(P, i, c )
> L · r
> realize (i)Return v
> eval intent
> record
> allow effect
> deny/escalate

Figure 2: Operational semantics pipeline. A program term evaluates to an ask expression, pro-ducing an intent. The governance interpreter evaluates the intent against the policy, appends a decision record to the ledger, and either realizes the effect (Allow) or returns a denial/suspension (Deny/Escalate). No path from ask to effect realization bypasses governance and recording. 

2.6 Behavioral vs. Intent Governance 

The distinction between behavioral and intent governance is precise. Behavioral governance attempts to decide properties of program execution: “does this program only access approved resources?” Rice’s theorem establishes that such decisions are undecidable for non-trivial properties of Turing-complete programs. Intent governance decides properties of finite data values: “does this intent request access to an approved resource?” Because intents are finite structured data with decidable equality, and policies are decidable predicates over that data, intent governance is total and computable. The architectural contribution is not that decidable predicates over finite data are decidable (which is trivially true) but that autonomous systems can be designed so that all effectful operations pass through this decidable layer. The design requires that the language provide no alternative path to effects. This is a non-trivial architectural constraint that most existing languages do not satisfy. 

# 3 Properties of the Model 

The following properties emerge from the intent-driven model. We state each property and sketch its proof; full mechanized proofs are available in Rocq. 

Property 1 (Governance Decidability) . For any policy set P and intent i, the governance decision 

G(P, i, c ) is computable and total. Proof sketch. We restrict policies to decidable predicates over finite intent data: each policy rule 

pj ∈ P is a total computable function from ( I × C) to {true , false }. Intents are finite data structures with bounded size. The governance interpreter evaluates each pj on ( i, c ) and combines results via a fixed combination strategy (e.g., deny-overrides). Since |P| is finite and each evaluation terminates, G is total and computable. Rice’s theorem does not apply: it constrains decisions about program extensional behavior , not decisions about finite data values. The mechanized proof is in 

GovernanceMediation.v (Theorem governance mediation total ). 6Property 2 (Coterminous Boundaries) . Within the intent-driven model, the expressiveness boundary and the governance boundary are identical. Every expressible effectful computation is governed. There is no expressible-but-ungoverned region. Proof sketch. Layer 1 (pure computation) is Turing-complete but cannot produce effects. Layer 2 (governed effects) mediates every intent through G. There is no third layer and no escape path. The expressiveness boundary (what programs can express) and the governance boundary (what governance mediates) coincide. The proof is mechanized in CoterminousBoundary.v .

Property 3 (Audit Completeness) . Every effectful action taken by an intent-driven program has a corresponding decision record in the ledger. The ledger is structurally complete: it contains a record for every intent, not merely for those that happened to be logged. Proof sketch. By the Allow, Deny, and Escalate rules, every intent transition appends a record 

r to L. There is no transition rule that produces an effect without appending to the ledger. Completeness follows from the exhaustiveness of the transition rules. The proof is mechanized in 

HashChainSpec.v .

Property 4 (Ledger Integrity) . The ledger L is tamper-evident. Each record rk includes a crypto-graphic hash hk = H(rk∥hk−1) where h0 is a genesis hash. Any modification to a record invalidates all subsequent hashes. Independent verification requires only the ledger and the hash function, not trust in the governance system. 

Property 5 (Governance Invariance Under Composition) . If program A calls program B (composi-tion), B’s intents are governed by the intersection of A’s capabilities and B’s declared requirements. Governance holds at every depth of composition. Proof sketch. Composition introduces a nested governance context. B’s intents are mediated by G

with an effective policy PB = {p ∈ P A | p is consistent with declared (B)}, where declared (B) is B’s capability declaration. The governance interpreter is invoked for every intent regardless of nesting depth; capabilities can only narrow, never widen, through composition. The proof is mechanized in 

CompositionPreserves.v (Theorem composition preserves governance ). 

Property 6 (Computational Completeness) . The pure computation layer is Turing-complete. Intent-driven programs can express any computable function. Governance restricts effects, not computation. Proof sketch. Layer 1 provides general recursion (recursive function definitions), conditionals, pattern matching, and operations on integers, strings, lists, and maps. These primitives suffice to encode a universal Turing machine: integers provide the tape alphabet, lists provide the tape, and recursive functions with pattern matching provide the transition function. Turing completeness is a property of the functions a language can compute, not of the effects it can cause; the absence of I/O in Layer 1 does not reduce computational power. The governance boundary restricts which intents are realized as effects, not what computations can be performed. The proof is mechanized in Completeness.v 

(Theorem turing completeness ). 

Scope of formal results. The calculus above establishes mediation, non-bypass, ledger com-pleteness, and decidability properties. It does not yet formalize a type-and-effect system or prove standard metatheoretic properties (progress, preservation). We leave typed metatheory to future work because the governance mediation properties are orthogonal to the core evaluation discipline: 7they hold for all programs admitted by the calculus, regardless of type discipline. A typed variant with effect annotations (distinguishing pure terms from intent-producing terms) and governance soundness as a metatheoretic property is under development. 

# 4 Emergent Consequences 

The properties above are not features designed into the system. They are structural consequences of operating at the intent layer. This section describes four consequences that emerge from the model. 

4.1 Event Sourcing by Construction 

Every intent produces a decision record appended to a hash-chained ledger. The ledger is, by construction, an event store in the event-sourcing sense Fowler [2005]: an append-only sequence of immutable events from which system state can be reconstructed. In traditional systems, event sourcing is an architectural pattern that must be deliberately adopted and consistently maintained. In intent-driven systems, event sourcing is unavoidable: every effectful operation produces an event (the governance decision) as a structural consequence of intent mediation. The event store cannot be incomplete because completeness is enforced by the transition rules. 

4.2 Governance Simulation 

Because the intent stream is structurally complete, historical intents can be replayed against new or hypothetical governance policies: 

simulate (P′, [i1, . . . , i n]) = [ G(P′, i 1, c 1), . . . , G(P′, i n, c n)] This answers the question: “What would have happened last week if we had deployed this new policy?” The answer is computed directly from the recorded intent stream, without re-executing any programs. A behavioral-governance system can only offer this capability to the extent that its logs are complete and replayable; intent-driven systems make that completeness a semantic invariant rather than an instrumentation aspiration. Governance simulation transforms governance from reactive (enforce rules now) to predictive (model the impact of policy changes before deployment). A correctness condition for simulation is that governance decisions must be deterministic: 

G(P, i, c ) = G(P, i, c ) for identical inputs. This holds when policies are pure functions over intent data and recorded context. When the runtime context ck depends on previous effect results (e.g., a database state modified by a prior intent), replay requires either recorded context snapshots or deterministic context reconstruction from the event stream. 

4.3 Structural Audit 

Traditional audit reconstructs what happened from logs, timestamps, and system state. Intent-driven audit verifies a structured record of what was proposed, what was decided, under which policy, and whether the decision chain is tamper-evident. The distinction is not quantitative (better logs) but structural: the audit record exists by construction and can be independently verified without trusting the governance system. An auditor 8receives the ledger, the policy set, and the hash function. They recompute the hash chain and verify that every decision is consistent with the stated policy. No access to the runtime is required. 

4.4 Human Comprehensibility 

Intents are semantic: they describe proposed actions in terms that humans can read and reason about. A compliance officer can examine “send email to client@co.com with subject Invoice #4821” and un-derstand what the system proposed. They cannot do the same with requests.post("https://api.example.com/.. headers= {... }, json= {... }).This comprehensibility extends to localization. Because the abstraction layer is semantic intent rather than syntax manipulation, the computational model does not depend on English-centric symbolic conventions. Intent structures can be expressed in any human language because the underlying model is semantic, not syntactic. Intent-driven systems also reduce what we call governance ceremony : the overhead required to make governance work when the underlying system was not designed for it. In traditional systems, governance requires wrappers, policy files, middleware, RBAC configuration, and approval pipelines. In intent-driven systems, the developer expresses what should happen; the runtime handles authorization, recording, and mediation. The programming model shifts from implementing safety mechanisms to declaring desired actions. 

# 5 Architecture and Implementation 

We have implemented the intent-driven model in a concrete language architecture. The implementa-tion serves as existence proof that the model is realizable with practical performance characteristics. 

5.1 Language Design 

The language uses keyword-hierarchy syntax (indentation-based, no braces) with two structural layers reflecting the two-layer model: 

• Structural layer (∼90% of a typical program): declarative sections specifying objectives, contracts (inputs and outputs), constraints, and capability declarations. These sections are structural metadata, not executable code. 

• Expression layer (∼10%): pure functional computation within compute steps. General-purpose, with no I/O capability by construction. All effectful operations are expressed as intent production: Listing 1: Intent production in the language. The ask keyword produces an intent to invoke an effect machine. The governance interpreter mediates the intent before execution. 

> step send_invoice: ask { machine "@stdlib/email/send" input { to: context.customer.email subject: "Invoice #" + context.invoice.id body: context.draft }}

9The ask keyword produces an intent. The governance interpreter evaluates the intent against declared permissions, records the decision, and either realizes the effect or returns a denial to the program. The program cannot bypass this mediation because the language provides no alternative path to effects. 

5.2 Governance Kernel 

The governance kernel is formally verified in Rocq 8.19. The verification covers 454 theorems across 36 modules with zero admitted lemmas. Key verified properties include: 

• Governance mediation totality : every intent is mediated ( GovernanceMediation.v )

• Coterminous boundaries : expressiveness and governance boundaries coincide ( CoterminousBoundary.v )

• Composition preservation : governance holds under arbitrary nesting ( CompositionPreserves.v )

• Hash chain integrity : ledger tamper-evidence ( HashChainSpec.v )The governance kernel is extracted from Rocq to native code via OCaml extraction, then bridged to the runtime via a native interface. The runtime, extraction pipeline, and operating system constitute the trusted computing base; the governance logic itself is proved correct. 

5.3 Runtime 

Programs compile to BEAM (Erlang virtual machine) bytecode. The BEAM provides preemptive scheduling, fault tolerance, hot code loading, and distribution. The governance interpreter runs as part of the BEAM runtime, mediating every intent before effect realization. We validate the implementation with 10,312 tests covering the parser, compiler, governance mediator, ledger integrity, and end-to-end execution paths. 

5.4 Trusted Computing Base 

The TCB for governance guarantees consists of: (1) the BEAM virtual machine, (2) the OCaml extraction pipeline from Rocq, (3) the native interface bridge, (4) the operating system, and (5) the hardware. The governance kernel itself is proved correct in Rocq. Bugs in the TCB could invalidate governance guarantees. This is standard for verified systems (cf. seL4, CertiKOS). 

# 6 How Intent-Driven Computing Changes Programming 

Intent-driven computing changes the programming experience in several concrete ways. 

Writing. Programmers express desired actions rather than implementing effect mechanics. Instead of constructing HTTP requests, managing authentication headers, handling retries, and instrument-ing logs, the programmer writes an intent (“send email to customer with subject Invoice #4821”) and declares constraints (“requires approval if amount exceeds threshold”). The runtime handles authorization, recording, and execution. In our implementation corpus, most program text appears in structural declarations; pure computation typically occupies a small fraction of the source. 10 Operation p50 p95 p99 mean                         

> Policy evaluation (5 rules) <1<1<1<1Policy evaluation (10 rules) <1<1<1<1Policy evaluation (20 rules) 1121Hash computation (SHA-256) <1<1<1<1Ledger append (SQLite WAL) 560 838 1,702 648
> Total governance 535 760 1,186 591

Table 2: Governance overhead per intent mediation (microseconds). Policy evaluation and hash computation are sub-microsecond. The ledger append (SQLite in WAL mode) dominates total overhead. 

Reasoning. Programs are easier to reason about because effectful operations are visible as intent productions. A code reviewer can identify every external interaction by searching for ask expressions. There are no hidden effects in helper functions, no ambient I/O in utility modules, no effects buried in library calls. The effect surface is syntactically manifest. 

Testing. Intent-driven programs can be tested by intercepting intents before realization. A test harness provides a mock governance interpreter that records intents without executing effects. The test asserts on the intent sequence rather than on side effects. This is structurally similar to testing with algebraic effect handlers, but with the additional property that the test can verify governance decisions (which intents were allowed, denied, or escalated under which policy). 

Debugging and Replay. Every execution produces a complete intent stream in the ledger. A developer can replay any execution step-by-step, inspecting each intent, the governance decision, and the realized effect. This is not a debugger feature; it is a consequence of the model. The replay is deterministic for governance decisions (same policy, same intent, same context yields same decision). 

Evolving. Governance simulation enables safe evolution: before deploying a code change, replay the prior week’s intents against the new code’s governance policy to predict behavioral differences. Before changing a policy, replay historical intents against the new policy to measure impact. This transforms deployment from “deploy and hope” to “simulate and verify.” 

# 7 Evaluation 

We evaluate the intent-driven model along four dimensions. 

7.1 Governance Overhead 

Intent mediation introduces latency for each effectful operation. In our implementation, the governance interpreter evaluates policy predicates and appends a hash-chained ledger record. Measured overhead per governance decision: 

Methodology. Measurements taken on Apple M4 Pro (14-core, 48GB) running the BEAM virtual machine (OTP 28, Elixir 1.19). 10,000 iterations after 1,000 warmup iterations per measurement. Policy evaluation uses in-memory rule sets with decidable predicates (string prefix matching, set membership, numeric comparison). Ledger append uses SQLite 3 in WAL mode with PRAGMA 

11 Module Theorems Lines Admitted                            

> GovernanceMediation.v 18 890 0CoterminousBoundary.v 12 620 0Completeness.v 15 740 0Safety.v 24 1,210 0CompositionPreserves.v 19 980 0HashChainSpec.v 14 710 0InterpreterSpec.v 22 1,100 0
> (29 additional modules) 330 5,977 0
> Total 454 12,227 0

Table 3: Rocq proof artifact summary. All theorems are machine-checked with zero admitted lemmas. The artifact is available for review. 

synchronous=NORMAL (no fsync per record; fsync on WAL checkpoint). Policy evaluation scales linearly with rule count. The total governance overhead of ∼535 μs (p50) is dominated by the ledger append (SQLite I/O). Policy evaluation and hash computation are sub-microsecond and negligible. For the target workload (AI agent operations: HTTP requests at 10–500 ms, database queries at 1–50 ms), the governance overhead represents less than 5% of operation latency. For sub-millisecond operations, alternative ledger backends (in-memory with periodic flush, or a purpose-built append-only store) could reduce overhead significantly; we leave this optimization to future work. 

7.2 Case Study: Refund Agent 

We implemented the refund agent from §1 in the intent-driven language. The agent processes customer refund requests by accessing email, CRM records, the refund policy, and a payment API. Over a simulated workload of 200 refund requests, the agent produced 847 intents: 423 allowed, 312 denied (policy violations: exceeded refund limit, accessed unauthorized customer records), and 112 escalated (amounts above threshold requiring human approval). The complete intent stream was replayed against a modified policy (increased refund limit from $500 to $1000), showing that 89 of the 312 denied intents would have been allowed, enabling faster processing for medium-value refunds. 

7.3 Proof Artifact 7.4 Property-Based Validation 

We validate correspondence between the Rocq specification and the runtime implementation using property-based testing. The test generator produces random intent sequences, governance policies, and execution contexts. For each input, both the Rocq-extracted governance kernel and the runtime implementation produce a decision; the test asserts they agree. Over 70,000+ random inputs, zero disagreements were found. One real bug was discovered early in the process: a capability classification mismatch between the specification and the implementation, invisible to conventional unit tests, detected by the formal specification. 12 Era Abstraction Shift Absorbed Concern                                           

> Assembly →Cmachine ops →procedures register management C→managed runtimes manual →automatic memory memory management Servers →cloud hardware →API calls infrastructure Imperative →declarative UI DOM mutation →state rendering mechanics Procedural →SQL traversal →data intent storage access Manual →Kubernetes scripts →desired state deployment Effects →intents execution →mediation effect governance

Table 4: Abstraction shifts in computing history. Each transition absorbs a class of concerns into the platform. Intent-driven computing absorbs effect governance. 

# 8 Historical Context: Abstraction Shifts in Computing 

Major computing transitions happen when the abstraction level changes. Each transition follows a common pattern: a concern that developers managed manually is absorbed into a runtime or platform, and developers begin operating at a higher level. Table 4 situates intent-driven computing within this lineage. The claim is not that intent-driven computing is inevitable, but that it follows the established pattern: as systems become more autonomous, the concern of governing their effects is too important and too complex to leave to ad-hoc application-level code. The platform level appears to be the natural locus for this concern. The analogy to SQL is particularly instructive. Before SQL, accessing data required specifying traversal mechanics: which index to use, how to join tables, in what order to scan. SQL raised the abstraction to data intent : specify what data you want, and the query optimizer handles the mechanics. Intent-driven computing raises the abstraction similarly: specify what action you want, and the governed runtime handles authorization, recording, and execution. 

# 9 Comparison with Related Models 

Intent-driven computing draws on and extends several existing computational models. We distinguish the model from each. 

9.1 Effect Systems 

Algebraic effect systems Plotkin and Pretnar [2009], Bauer and Pretnar [2015] separate the description of effects from their handling. A computation performs an effect; a handler interprets it. This is structurally similar to intent production and governance mediation. Row-typed effect systems such as Koka Leijen [2017] provide static tracking of which effects a computation may perform. The key differences are: (1) effect systems are primarily a type-theoretic mechanism for modular effect handling, not a governance mechanism; (2) effect handlers do not inherently record decisions in a tamper-evident ledger; (3) effect systems do not mandate that all effects pass through a single mediation boundary (programs may have unhandled effects or use ambient capabilities). Intent-driven computing can be viewed as a specialization of algebraic effects where: every effect is an intent, every handler includes governance and recording, and no unhandled effects are permitted. 

Free and freer monads. Free monads and freer monads Kiselyov and Ishii [2015] reify effectful computations as data structures that can be interpreted by different handlers. This is closely 13 related to intent-driven computing: an intent is a reified effect request. The distinction is again the governance discipline: free monad interpreters are programmer-chosen and composable, while the governance interpreter is mandatory, singular, and records every decision. Free monads provide the mechanism; intent-driven computing adds the governance invariant. 

Monadic I/O. Haskell’s IO monad Peyton Jones [2001] separates pure computation from effects at the type level: pure functions cannot perform I/O because the type system prevents it. This is the closest prior art to intent-driven computing’s two-layer separation. The key distinction is that Haskell’s IO monad is a type discipline, not a governance mechanism: IO actions execute directly without mediation, recording, or authorization. Intent-driven computing adds the governance interpreter between intent production and effect realization. 

Value/computation distinction. Levy’s call-by-push-value Levy [2004] provides a canonical framework for separating values from computations. Intents are values in this sense: they are data that describe proposed computations without executing them. The governance interpreter is the mechanism that “thunks” an intent value into a computation (effect realization) or blocks it (denial). 

9.2 Capability-Based Security 

Capability systems Dennis and Horn [1966], Miller et al. [2003] restrict programs to explicitly granted capabilities. A program cannot access a resource unless it holds the corresponding capability token. Capability systems and intent-driven computing share the principle of explicit authorization. The differences are: (1) capabilities are access tokens, not action descriptions; they authorize who 

can act, not what action is proposed; (2) capability systems do not inherently produce a complete audit trail; (3) capability revocation does not retroactively provide replay or simulation. Intent-driven computing complements capability systems: capabilities control access to intent production, while governance mediates the intents themselves. 

9.3 Event Sourcing 

Event sourcing Fowler [2005] stores state changes as a sequence of immutable events rather than mutable records. The system state can be reconstructed by replaying events. In traditional event-sourced systems, event sourcing is a deliberate architectural pattern that must be consistently maintained. Events must be manually defined, and there is no structural guarantee that every state change produces an event. In intent-driven systems, event sourcing is a structural consequence: every intent produces a governance decision record, which is an immutable event. The event store is complete by construction. This distinction matters for auditability: manually maintained event stores can have gaps; structurally produced event stores cannot (within the model assumptions). 

9.4 Desired-State Systems 

Kubernetes Burns et al. [2016], Terraform, and similar systems use desired-state declarations: the operator specifies the desired state, and the system converges toward it. Desired-state systems share the declarative philosophy with intent-driven computing but operate at a different level. Desired-state systems manage infrastructure convergence. Intent-driven systems manage action authorization. The two are complementary: an intent-driven program might produce 14 an intent to update a Kubernetes deployment, and the governance interpreter would mediate that intent. 

9.5 Behavioral Governance Approaches 

Content filters Rebedea et al. [2023], guardrails Bai et al. [2022], runtime monitors Leucker and Schallhart [2009], and managed agent platforms Anthropic [2025] represent the current state of AI governance. These systems observe agent behavior and attempt to detect or prevent violations. The fundamental limitation, as established in §1, is that behavioral governance over arbitrary programs in Turing-complete languages is inherently incomplete. Intent-driven computing resolves this by changing the abstraction: governance operates on intents (finite data), not on program behavior (undecidable in general). 

9.6 Authorization Logic 

Formal authorization logics Abadi [2003] provide decidable frameworks for access control decisions. Intent governance is related: the governance interpreter evaluates authorization predicates over intent data. The distinction is that authorization logics typically govern access (who may read/write a resource), while intent governance governs actions (what operation is proposed, with what parameters, in what context). Intent-driven computing can incorporate authorization logic as the policy language within the governance interpreter. 

9.7 Reference Monitors and Information Flow 

The reference monitor concept Anderson [1972] requires that every access to a protected resource passes through a single mediation point that is tamper-proof, always invoked, and small enough to verify. Intent-driven computing’s governance interpreter satisfies these requirements within the language model: it is always invoked (by the transition rules), the language provides no bypass (Non-Bypass theorem), and the kernel is formally verified. Language-based information flow control Sabelfeld and Myers [2003] uses type systems to track and enforce information flow policies. IFC and intent-driven computing address different concerns: IFC governs what information can flow where; intent mediation governs what effects can be realized. They are complementary and could be combined: an intent-driven language with IFC typing would govern both information flow and effect realization. 

9.8 Object-Capability Security and Sandboxing 

The object-capability discipline (E language, Caja Miller et al. [2008]) enforces the principle of least authority by restricting programs to capabilities they receive explicitly. WebAssembly Haas et al. [2017] provides a sandboxed execution environment with no ambient authority. Intent-driven computing shares the no-ambient-authority principle but adds governance mediation (deciding whether to allow each use of a capability) and recording (appending a decision record for each use). Capability systems say “you may use this resource”; intent mediation adds “and here is the record of every time you did.” 

9.9 Provenance and Verifiable Logs 

Data provenance systems Buneman et al. [2001] track the origin and transformation history of data. Verifiable log systems such as Certificate Transparency Laurie et al. [2013] provide tamper-evident 15 append-only records with cryptographic guarantees. Intent-driven computing’s behavioral ledger is a verifiable log specialized for governance decisions. The structural difference is that provenance and log systems are typically instrumentation overlays (they log what they are configured to log), while the intent-driven ledger is structurally complete: every intent produces a record by the transition rules, not by instrumentation. 

# 10 Limitations and Scope 

Intent-driven computing addresses structural governance of effects. It does not address: 

• Model alignment. Intent-driven systems govern what programs do , not what models believe 

or intend in the AI alignment sense. A governed program can execute a harmful plan if the plan’s individual actions are each authorized. Content governance (what models say) and structural governance (what programs do) are complementary. 

• Side channels. The model assumes that the only path to effects is through intent production. Side channels (timing, power, electromagnetic) are outside the model. The runtime, OS, and hardware are in the trusted computing base. 

• Policy correctness. The governance interpreter faithfully enforces the stated policy. Whether the policy itself is correct, complete, or aligned with organizational goals is an orthogonal concern. 

• Performance overhead. Intent mediation introduces latency for every effectful operation. In our implementation, governance decisions add microseconds to millisecond-scale operations (HTTP requests, database queries). For nanosecond-scale operations, this overhead may be significant. 

• Expressiveness constraints. Programs that require fine-grained interleaving of computation and effects (e.g., streaming I/O with per-byte governance) may find the intent-per-operation granularity too coarse. The model supports configurable intent granularity but cannot govern below the intent boundary. The scope of the guarantee is precise: within the intent-driven model and trusted computing base assumptions, every effectful action is authorized, recorded, and independently verifiable. Claims beyond this scope are not supported. 

# 11 Conclusion 

Traditional computing assumes programs directly execute effects. This assumption worked when humans authored every instruction. As systems become autonomous (generating behavior dynam-ically, reasoning probabilistically, acting on real-world infrastructure), the assumption becomes structurally problematic. Intent-driven computing proposes a different abstraction: programs produce intents, runtimes mediate effects. This separation yields governance decidability, structural audit completeness, event sourcing by construction, governance simulation, and improved human comprehensibility: not designed features but emergent consequences of operating at the intent layer. We have formalized the model, proved its key properties in Rocq McCann [2026b], implemented it in a concrete language architecture building on prior work on coterminous boundaries McCann 16 [2026d] and effect-transparent governance McCann [2026a], and situated it within the historical lineage of abstraction shifts in computing. A key architectural question for governed autonomous computation is where the intent boundary falls. When computation and effect realization are fused, governance is necessarily approximate, audit is incomplete, and replay requires reconstruction rather than following natively from the architecture. Intent-driven computing draws that boundary explicitly. Future work includes extending the model to streaming effects (where intent granularity must be negotiated against latency), developing a typed calculus with metatheoretic guarantees (progress, preservation, governance soundness), investigating policy languages that preserve governance de-cidability under composition, and evaluating the performance overhead of intent mediation in latency-sensitive workloads. 

# References 

Mart´ ın Abadi. Logic in access control. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS) , pages 228–233, 2003. doi: 10.1109/LICS.2003.1210062. James P. Anderson. Computer security technology planning study. In Technical Report ESD-TR-73-51 , 1972. Anthropic. Claude managed agents. https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/agents-and-tools ,2025. Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022. Andrej Bauer and Matija Pretnar. Programming with algebraic effects and handlers. Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming , 84(1):108–123, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.jlamp.2014. 02.001. Peter Buneman, Sanjeev Khanna, and Wang-Chiew Tan. Why and where: A characterization of data provenance. pages 316–330, 2001. doi: 10.1007/3-540-44503-X 20. Brendan Burns, Brian Grant, David Oppenheimer, Eric Brewer, and John Wilkes. Borg, omega, and kubernetes. ACM Queue , 14(1):70–93, 2016. doi: 10.1145/2898442.2898444. Jack B. Dennis and Earl C. Van Horn. Programming semantics for multiprogrammed computations. 

Communications of the ACM , 9(3):143–155, 1966. doi: 10.1145/365230.365252. Martin Fowler. Event sourcing. https://martinfowler.com/eaaDev/EventSourcing.html , 2005. Andreas Haas, Andreas Rossberg, Derek L. Schuff, Ben L. Titzer, Michael Holman, Dan Gohman, Luke Wagner, Alon Zakai, and JF Bastien. Bringing the web up to speed with WebAssembly. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , pages 185–200, 2017. doi: 10.1145/3062341.3062363. Oleg Kiselyov and Hiromi Ishii. Freer monads, more extensible effects. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Haskell , pages 94–105, 2015. doi: 10.1145/2804302.2804319. Ben Laurie, Adam Langley, and Emilia K¨ asper. Certificate transparency. In RFC 6962 , 2013. 17 Daan Leijen. Type directed compilation of row-typed algebraic effects. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages , 1(POPL), 2017. doi: 10.1145/3009837.3009872. Martin Leucker and Christian Schallhart. A brief account of runtime verification. The Journal of Logic and Algebraic Programming , 78(5):293–303, 2009. doi: 10.1016/j.jlap.2008.08.004. Paul Blain Levy. Call-By-Push-Value: A Functional/Imperative Synthesis . Semantics Structures in Computation. Springer, 2004. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-0954-6. Alan L. McCann. Effect-transparent governance for AI workflow architectures: Semantic preservation, expressive minimality, and decidability boundaries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01030 , 2026a. Alan L. McCann. Mechanized foundations of structural governance: Machine-checked proofs for governed intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.27289 , 2026b. Alan L. McCann. Certified purity for cognitive workflow executors: From static analysis to cryptographic attestation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01037 , 2026c. Alan L. McCann. The two boundaries: Why behavioral AI governance fails structurally. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.27292 , 2026d. Mark S. Miller, Ka-Ping Yee, and Jonathan Shapiro. Capability myths demolished. In Technical Report SRL2003-02 , 2003. Mark S. Miller, Mike Samuel, Ben Laurie, Ihab Awad, and Mike Stay. Safe active content in sanitized JavaScript. In Google Technical Report , 2008. Simon Peyton Jones. Tackling the awkward squad: Monadic input/output, concurrency, exceptions, and foreign-language calls in Haskell. In Engineering Theories of Software Construction , pages 47–96. IOS Press, 2001. Gordon Plotkin and Matija Pretnar. Handlers of algebraic effects. In Programming Languages and Systems (ESOP 2009) , volume 5502 of LNCS , pages 80–94. Springer, 2009. doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-642-00590-9 7. Traian Rebedea, Razvan Dinu, Makesh Sreedhar, Christopher Parisien, and Jonathan Cohen. Nemo guardrails: A toolkit for controllable and safe LLM applications with programmable rails. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10501 , 2023. Henry Gordon Rice. Classes of recursively enumerable sets and their decision problems. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society , 74(2):358–366, 1953. doi: 10.2307/1990888. Andrei Sabelfeld and Andrew C. Myers. Language-based information-flow security. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications , 21(1):5–19, 2003. doi: 10.1109/JSAC.2002.806121. 18