Title: Robust Indicators of Spatial Association

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07215v2

Published Time: Fri, 10 Jul 2026 01:16:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
# Robust Indicators of Spatial Association 

# Levi John Wolf School of Geographical Sciences, University of Bristol and Wei Kang Center for Geospatial Sciences, School of Public Policy, University of California, Riverside July 9, 2026 

Abstract 

The Moran statistic and its accompanying local statistics are among the most widely used exploratory tools for assessing global and local spatial autocorrelation. Their paired visualizations, the Moran Scatterplot and LISA map, are similarly cen-tral to spatial analysis, together helping identify spatial clusters, regions where ob-servations resemble their surroundings, and spatial outliers, observations that differ sharply from them. However, using Moran statistics to detect spatial outliers is complicated by their high sensitivity to distributional outliers: observations that are extreme relative to the overall data distribution, regardless of spatial context. Asingle distributional outlier can (I) distort local statistics across the entire map and (II) bias the global estimate of spatial association. In this paper, we offer the first systematic evaluation of robust LISA and global spatial association measures, using a variety of plug-in robust estimators, a trimmed least squares (TLS) estimator, and a Theil-Sen-style estimator. We also outline a visualization strategy for constructing Robust Moran Scatterplots and LISA maps for each estimator. Across all approaches considered, we find that the Theil-Sen Moran estimator is the better default for ex-ploratory spatial data analysis and visualization, while robust plug-in estimators offer acceptable performance in large datasets. 

Keywords: spatial autocorrelation, robust statistics, LISA, trimmed least squares, spatial analysis, conditional permutation 1arXiv:2607.07215v2 [stat.ME] 9 Jul 2026 1 Introduction 

The local Moran statistic (Anselin 1995) is, by a wide margin, the most heavily used local indicator of spatial association in applied work. Its appeal comes from two core reasons. First, it is a decomposition of the global Moran’s 𝐼 (Moran 1948, Cliff & Ord 1981) classifying observations into either spatial clusters (sites that are strongly similar to their surroundings) or spatial outliers (sites that significantly different from their surroundings). Other common exploratory spatial statistics, like the Getis-Ord 𝐺 (Getis & Ord 1992), have local statistics that classify observations into high or low clusters only (Ord & Getis 1995). This limits their usefulness in identifying anomalous observations in a map. The second advantage for the Moran statistic is its natural paired visualization: the Moran scatterplot offers a simple way to visualize the local and global spatial association in a given dataset (Anselin 1996). A paired Local Moran map and Moran Scatterplot frequently provide the first point of entry for general statisticians or non-geographers to assess spatial structure during exploratory spatial data analysis. Many studies have sought to extend or adapt the basic ideas of local indicators of spatial association (Getis & Ord 1996, Lee 2001, Li et al. 2007, Ord & Getis 2012, Rey 2016, Anselin 2019, Naimi et al. 2019, Wolf 2024). For much of this work on exploratory spatial statistics, innovation occurs in moving “beyond Moran’s 𝐼 ” (Li et al. 2007) to focus on new estimands that summarise different kinds of outcomes (Berglund & Karlstrøm 1999, Li et al. 2007, Ord & Getis 2012, Rey 2016, Tao & Thill 2016, Naimi et al. 2019) or generalize univariate statistics to more dimensions (Dray & Jombart 2011, Anselin 2019, Wolf 2024). Most new global statistics also seek to identify a natural paired visualization as a scatterplot, as well as the ability to classify observations in the map into “clusters” or “outliers” relative to their surroundings (Ord 2023). 2Sometimes, arguments about these local indicators critique the estimand that different es-timators or inference methods seek to recover. For instance, Lee (2001)’s analysis of the bivariate global association statistic by Wartenberg (1985) suggests an alternative spatial correlation framework to study bivariate association, while Wolf (2024) goes further still to define a generalized multivariate spatial association estimator using partial dependence (Waugh & Frisch 1933). Li et al. (2007) provides a critique of Moran statistics by changing estimand entirely from the Moran-form regression to a spatial lag model (Anselin 1988), offering both univariate global and local statistics in this new reverse regression. Addi-tional work has focused on improving statistical inference methods, especially for local indicators of spatial association (Sokal et al. 1993, Tiefelsdorf & Boots 1995, Sokal et al. 1998, Tiefelsdorf 2002, Sauer et al. (2022)). Even in this literature, however, the efficiency of the estimator itself is usually not assessed, nor are alternative estimators for the same estimand explored. In this vein, Wolf & Kang (2025) recently showed that ordinary least squares (OLS), the core estimating strategy for Moran-type statistics, is a poor estimator choice for exploratory analysis. A single sufficiently extreme observation (which we’ll refer to as a distributional outlier ) anywhere in the sample can drag the Moran’s 𝐼 estimate to an arbitrarily distant value. This also significantly affects local statistics. For instance, in the case of a positive outlier (or increasing positive skew), an increasing fraction of the data can become classified as “low-low” coldspot clusters. This is concerning precisely because local Moran statistics are routinely deployed to identify unusual observations and find anomalous areas of a given map or image. Indeed, an estimator that can be misled by a single distributional outlier or skew should probably not be the default tool for identifying spatial outliers. From a statistical perspective, the global aspect of this problem is well-understood. The 3conventional global Moran statistic is a least squares estimator, making it sensitive to dis-tributional outliers. Indeed, this implies it has a finite sample breakdown point of 1/𝑛 

(Rousseeuw & Leroy 1987, Maronna et al. 2006). This applies even without exploring the potential for configurational effects (Ma & Genton 2000), where an adversary can manipu-late both what site gets which corrupted value and what other sites are connected to the corrupted value. While the finite sample breakdown point of OLS is commonly-understood, its relevance and application for local (and global) indicators of spatial association have only recently begun to recieve attention (Nardelli & Salvini 2025). While geographers are generally aware of the impact of spatial data quality issues such as the perennial is-sue of overshoots/undershoots (Rey et al. 2026) and Null Island’s continued popularity (Juhasz & Mooney 2022), the near automatic use of paired Moran scatterplots and maps in exploratory spatial data analysis is seriously challenged by this sensitivity. Indeed, a more robust drop-in replacement estimator (instead of an alternative estimand, Li et al. (2007)) would be transformative, given how common local Moran statistics are and their persistence in the day to day practice of exploratory spatial data analysis. Like the growth of permutation-based inference methods as drop-in replacements for classical estimators (Simon 1999, Good 2011, Efron & Hastie 2016, Simon et al. forthcoming), a drop-in robust replacement for the global and local Moran statistic could see widespread use. Inference on these estimators is already largely permutation-based (Sokal et al. 1993, Sauer et al. 2022), so robust and valid inference on such a drop-in robust estimator would be immediately achieved. Therefore, this paper studies and extends recent innovations in robust spatial autocorrela-tion estimators over the last few years. We outline Arbia & Nardelli (2025)’s Gnanadesikan-Kettenring and local “plug-in” robust estimators, Wolf & Kang (2025)’s Theil-Sen estima-4tor, and fully specify Wolf & Kang (2025)’s sketch of the trimmed least squares (TLS) Moran estimator (from Rousseeuw & Van Driessen (2006)) for the first time. This estima-tor iteratively censors distributional outliers from consideration when representing spatial context and when estimating spatial association. We propose a novel search procedure to iteratively refine the trimmed fraction, in order to maximize the efficiency of the statis-tic and improve its applicability for local analysis, and outline a fast permutation-based inference technique. We also clarify an important aspect of permutation inference with Theil-Sen estimation of Local Moran statistics. Given these new plug-in, Theil-Sen, and TLS indicators of local and global spatial association, we run simulations across outlier-and skew-based spatial processes to estimate the size, power, and performance of robust autocorrelation statistics. We also define the paired Moran scatterplots for each of these robust visualizations, and show a cartographic strategy for visualizing TLS local statistics. Ultimately, we suggest that the Theil-Sen estimator should replace the OLS Moran estima-tor in smaller data, while the plug-in robust estimators can be used in larger data where efficiency is less of a concern. 

# 2 Framing the Moran-Form Regression 

To understand local and global measures of spatial association, it helps first to begin with the Moran-form regression. In this setup, define 𝑧 , a row-centered variate, and W, the 

𝑁 × 𝑁 spatial weights matrix (Anselin 1996) which records the spatial linkages between observations. This might represent adjacency relations between polygons within a lattice, points that neighbor one another on a Delaunay or KNN graph, adjacent pixels in an image, or connected points of interest in a city road network. W is also usually row-standardized, such that each row sums to one. Then, the typical Moran-form regression is a procedure 5to estimate Morans’ 𝐼 using a regression: 

W𝑧 = 𝛼 + 𝐼 𝑧 + 𝑒 (1) The global 𝐼 is the OLS slope for this regression: ̂𝐼 = (𝑧 ′𝑧) −1 𝑧 ′W𝑧 = 1𝑛 ∑

> 𝑖

∑

> 𝑗

𝑧 𝑖 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 𝑧 𝑗 (2) This estimator is a global indicator of spatial association , which describes the covariation between observations and the average of observations nearby. When positive, it indicates that nearby observations are more similar to one another than if values were distributed randomly across the map. From here, so-called local indicators of spatial association (LISA) (Anselin 1995) are developed to describe the relationship between observations and their neighbors at each site in the data. For the Moran statistic, local statistics are obtained by switching the inner product to an elementwise product: ̂𝐼 𝑖 ∝ 𝑧 𝑖 ⋅ ( W𝑧) 𝑖 (3) When considering the robustness of these estimators, we know that the finite sample break-down point for the estimator in Equation 2 is 1/𝑛 since it is an OLS estimator. However, because the Moran-form regression involves 𝑧 on both sides of the regression, there are additional effects. To make the consequences concrete: consider a single distributional outlier 𝑧 𝑘 with |𝑧 𝑘 | ≫ max 𝑗≠𝑘 |𝑧 𝑗 |. The outlier contributes both directly (as 𝑧 2𝑘 in the denominator and as 𝑧 𝑘 (W𝑧) 𝑘 in the numerator) and indirectly (as 𝑤 𝑖𝑘 𝑧 𝑘 in the spatial lag of every neighbour 𝑖 ∈ 𝒩(𝑘) ). As |𝑧 𝑘 | grows, both the global slope and the local statistics at 𝑘 ’s neighbours can be driven to arbitrarily large or small values.In practice, the slope of the Moran scatterplot is usually shallower than it would be otherwise if the outliers were properly identified and corrected. The same applies for skewed distributions. 6One formalization of this problem might involve the local influence function examined by Arbia & Nardelli (2026). This fundamental tool in robust statistics summarises the impact that any one observation has on a statistic. Arbia & Nardelli (2026) correctly note that “the influence function of the Moran coefficient depends on the contaminated value ... [and] also on the average of the values observed in the neighborhood of the contaminated location.” (p. 5). While this recognizes the fact that outliers contaminate the process both directly as sites and indirectly as lags, this focuses only on how changes at a specific site affect global estimates, not necessarily how the local statistic itself enters into the global summary. 

# 3 Rethinking Robustness for Local Statistics 

The local influence function is useful, especially for spatial econometric models where global estimates are the chief concern. However, for local statistics, it is important to be clear that the impact of distributional outliers —observations whose values of 𝑧 are unusual no matter where in the map they sit—may differ from that of spatial outliers —observations whose values of 𝑧 are unusual only relative to their spatial surroundings. Distributional outliers contaminate any estimator that uses 𝑧 ; spatial outliers are precisely the substantive signal that the LISA statistic is supposed to detect. The local influence function does not distinguish the two. Further, it does not as such provide a strategy for creating robust local indicators of spatial association that can keep a grip on this distinction. In light of this, a useful way to think about this is to decompose robust LISA estimation into two coupled sub-problems that separate how distributional outliers impact estimation: 

(I) Local Association. How do we (robustly) summarise the site and its surroundings in the presence of a distributional outlier? 7(II) Global Estimation. How do we (robustly) estimate the relationship between site values and this summary in the presence of a distributional outlier? In the classical Moran setup, (I) involves the row-standardised mean spatial lag, W𝑧 ,and (II) involves OLS. Both are non-robust, in the sense that the lag of 𝑧 is sensitive to distributional outliers nearby, and OLS is sensitive to extreme sites and extreme lags. Indeed, the two problems compound: an extreme 𝑧 𝑗 enters its neighbours’ lag (corrupting the local association), and it also enters the regression directly through 𝑧 𝑗 itself (corrupting the global estimation). Hence, a distributional outlier corrupts nearby observations’ vertical positions in the Moran Scatterplot in addition to being an outlier itself on the horizontal axis. However, a spatial outlier itself does not bias global estimation. This is apparent in Figure 1, where spatial outliers (in the upper right or bottom left quadrants) exist, but only corrupted data creates bias in the right pane. Hence, any local statistic may be contaminated by placing a corrupted within its neighbor set. Further, it is not necessary for the “corrupted” observations to themselves start as spatial outliers. Finally, any global estimate can also be contaminated from a single site in typical network topologies. 

# 3.1 Solving Local Association and Global Estimation separately 

Arbia & Nardelli (2025) and Nardelli & Salvini (2025) provide a robust measure of spatial association using weighted medians for lag calculations and median absolute deviations (MAD) for scale estimators within a generalised correlation coefficient (Gnanadesikan & Kettenring 1972). This “plug-in” strategy offers a robust Moran estimator by replacing non-robust estimators of scale, location, or covariance with robust estimators of the same estimand, solving the local association and global estimation using separate strategies. 8−2 0 2

> Site
> −2.0
> −1.5
> −1.0
> −0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Surrounding

Observed   

> −202
> Site
> −2.0
> −1.5
> −1.0
> −0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Surrounding

Corrupted Figure 1: Moran Scatterplot of a spatially-patterned random variable (left) and a corruption of the pattern (right). Corruption of a single observation entails moving one observation left or right. This, in turn, pushes other observations up and down. Depending on the connectivity structure, manipulations of a single observation adjust both the slope of the regression line (which is the classical Moran’s 𝐼 estimate) as well as all local statistics that are connected to the corrupted observation. Here, the corruption entails moving an observation left by 100, which also pulls many other observations downwards by adjusting their lag. For typical spatial weights matrices, left-down and right-up are the only possible directions for the corrupted observation and its neighbors’ points. 93.1.1 Problem (I): Robust Local Association 

The local association question concerns how outliers/skew corrupt estimates of the “typi-cal value” of surrounding sites; the mean is sensitive to outliers/skew, so spatial lags get corrupted before any association is ever attempted. To start, instead of standard nor-malization, Nardelli & Salvini (2025) use a robust normalization with the median and MAD, 𝑧 = (𝑦 − median (𝑦)) MAD (𝑦) where MAD (𝑦) = median (|𝑦 − median (𝑦)|) . Then, a plug-in strategy replaces the row-standardised mean of neighbours’ 𝑧 with a more robust local summary—Hampel-style M-estimate, a trimmed mean, or a weighted median over the neighbourhood. We’ll denote this as: 

W∗𝑧 = robust summary of {𝑧 𝑗 ∶ 𝑗 ∈ 𝒩(𝑖)} 

Nardelli & Salvini (2025) consider the (weighted) median for their robust summary. That is, W∗𝑧 calculates the (weighted) median of 𝑧 𝑖 for each site 𝑖 as the local association. This addresses one direction of contamination—the direction in which a neighbour’s outlier value 

𝑧 𝑘 pulls the vertical axis of the Moran scatterplot for sites 𝑖 ∈ 𝒩(𝑘) . After the fix, the robust summary at 𝑖 is unaffected by 𝑧 𝑘 unless 𝑘 comprises a majority of 𝑖 ’s neighbours, which is rare for typical contiguity graphs. Then, a plug-in robust measure of local association is available as: ̂𝐼 plug-in  

> 𝑖

= 𝑧 𝑖 ∘ [ W∗𝑧] 𝑖 (4) We call this the plug-in estimator for local association. 

3.1.2 Problem (II): Robust Global Autocorrelation from Local Statistics 

From this point, one could create a global measure of spatial autocorrelation using OLS with this robust lag: 

∑𝑖 𝑧 𝑖 (W∗𝑧) 𝑖 

∑𝑖 𝑧 2𝑖 

10 Despite the robust local association, this is not a robust global indicator. A site whose own 

𝑧 𝑖 is a distributional outlier still contributes 𝑧 2𝑖 to the denominator and 𝑧 𝑖 (W∗𝑧) 𝑖 to the numerator. As |𝑧 𝑖 | grows, the slope is pulled towards a line that passes through (𝑧 𝑖 , ( W∗𝑧) 𝑖 )

regardless of the structure of the rest of the data. Hence, the breakdown point along this second axis remains 1/𝑛 .An alternative might also be to construct the median-of-local site estimators: ̂𝐼 𝑀𝑂𝑀 = median (𝑧 𝑖 ∘ [ W∗𝑧] 𝑖 ) (5) While this estimator is straightforward to implement and is clearly related to the local estimator, we focus instead on Nardelli & Salvini (2025)’s preferred estimator based on Gnanadesikan & Kettenring (1972)’s nonparametric correlation. Defining 𝑎 −1 = 𝑀 𝐴𝐷(𝑧) 

and 𝑏 −1 = 𝑀𝐴𝐷( W∗𝑧) , we use the polarization identity to convert the inner product between 𝑧 and W𝑧 into a quotient relating the deviation of their sums and differences: ̂𝐼 𝐺𝐾 = MAD (𝑎𝑧 + 𝑏 W∗𝑧) − MAD (𝑎𝑧 − 𝑏 W∗𝑧) 

MAD (𝑎𝑧 + 𝑏 W∗𝑧) + MAD (𝑎𝑧 − 𝑏 W∗𝑧) (6) This is a robust plug-in estimator for the global correlation between z and W∗z that is functionally separate from the local robust estimate in Equation 4. Regardless, they can be used together to define a robust Moran Scatterplot: 𝐼 𝐺𝐾 estimates the slope for a plot of 

W∗𝑧 onto robustly-standardized 𝑧 through the origin, with 𝐼 𝑖 allowing for local inference on observations in quadrants defined according to the medians of 𝑧 and W∗𝑧 .The breakdown point of these estimators is somewhat complex since it depends on the topology of W. Typical W matrices used spatial analysis are sparsely-connected, non-negative, row-standardized, have minimum degree larger than 1, and are not star-like. Under these conditions, these estimators have a 50% finite sample breakdown point: a single corrupted site is isolated from nearby sites through the robust spatial lag, and the global 11 estimator is isolated from the corrupted site by the median absolute deviation. Regardless of the breakdown point, though, we expect these statistics to be somewhat underpowered, especially in skewed distributions (Rousseeuw & Croux 1993). 1 Thus, we explore other estimators for local and global spatial association that have higher power. 

# 3.2 Theil-Sen Regression Addresses Local and Global Robustness 

To improve power, it is useful to explore robustness strategies informed by the wider (geo)statistical literature. For instance, estimators of Dowd (1984) and Genton (1998) are fairly efficient. They consider quantiles of pairwise differences, which improves their general performance. The nonparametric estimator of Bjornstad & Falck (2001) also exam-ines fitting general functions of pairwise relationships in spatial data. In this vein, Wolf & Kang (2025) argue that instead of plug-in estimators, a robust regression-based estimator can solve (I) and (II) simultaneously. However, this requires us to change the framing of the problem from a robust regression on robust local associations to solving a single robust weighted regression across all pairs of observations, as visualized in Figure 2. The local part refers to the relation between a robust regression line and the vertical stripe of points at each 𝑧 𝑖 value; the global part refers to the slope of the robust regression line itself. This also clarifies how a contaminated observation 𝑧 𝑘 shows up as both the horizontal coordi-nate (in pairs (𝑧 𝑘 , 𝑧 𝑗 )) and the vertical coordinate (in pairs (𝑧 𝑖 , 𝑧 𝑘 )) of many points in the scatter. To estimate this regression line in a robust fashion, Wolf & Kang (2025) define a Theil-Sen iterated medians estimator for local and global Moran statistics: the local asso-ciation is robustly estimated using the weighted median of slopes constructed from pairs of points located at 𝑧 𝑖 , while the global estimation is addressed using weighted median of 

> 1This is where Arbia & Nardelli (2025)’s comparison with Box-Cox de-skewing transforms becomes quite interesting. This is deserving of further study as a central concept, and we defer it here.

12 local medians. To provide more detail on this estimation strategy, let’s define 𝑍 𝑖 and 𝑍 𝑗 as two matched vectors of 𝑧 , where the 𝑘 th entry of each describes one pair (𝑖, 𝑗) . Let ̃ W be the diagonal matrix of pairwise weights, with ̃ W𝑘𝑘 = 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 . The weighted-least-squares estimator ̂𝐼 WLS = (𝑍 𝑖′ ̃ W𝑍 𝑖 )−1 𝑍 𝑖′ ̃ W𝑍 𝑗 (7) returns the same value as Equation 2 for typical W. This is because the two are unbiased estimators of the same estimand: the relationship between 𝑧 𝑖 and the values of 𝑧 𝑗 in the rest of the map, weighted by spatial proximity. The classical estimator first averages 𝑧 𝑗 

over 𝑗 ∈ 𝒩(𝑖) and then runs OLS on that average; the all-pairs estimator considers all pairs (𝑧 𝑖 , 𝑧 𝑗 ) at once, weighting each pair by 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 .−3 −2 −1 0 1 2 3

> zi
> −3
> −2
> −1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> Surrounding

Moran Scatterplot       

> −3−2−10123
> zi
> Site

All-Pairs Moran Scatterplot 

Figure 2: Comparison between the classic Moran Scatterplot (left) and the implied all-pairs weighted linear regression (right), where pairs of points 𝑧 𝑖 , 𝑧 𝑗 are made darker proportional to their 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 value. As a robust alternative to WLS, the Theil-Sen-Moran estimator (with Siegel-style iterated 13 means) can be used. The Theil-Sen Local Moran estimator at each site is the median of site-specific slopes (shown in Equation 8) and the global estimator is the median of site medians (shown in Equation 9). To obtain these estimates, we calculate all of the slopes from (𝑧 𝑖 , 𝑧 𝑗 ) to any other point (𝑧 𝑘 , 𝑧 𝑙 ) for each 𝑖 such that neither 𝑗 ≠ 𝑘, 𝑙 and 𝑖 ≠ 𝑘, 𝑙 :

𝑠 𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 = 𝑧 𝑙 − 𝑧 𝑗 

𝑧 𝑘 − 𝑧 𝑖 

The weight of this slope is 𝑤 𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 = 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 𝑤 𝑘𝑙 . We then calculate the local Theil-Sen slope at 

𝑖 as the weighted median of these slopes over 𝑗𝑘𝑙 :̂𝐼 𝑇 𝑆 𝑖 = median (𝑠 𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 , 𝑤 𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 ) (8) From here, we calculate site weights as 𝑤 𝑖 = ∑ 𝑗𝑘𝑙 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 𝑤 𝑘𝑙 , and estimate the global slope as the weighted median of site-level slopes: ̂𝐼 𝑇 𝑆 = median (̂𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑤 𝑖 ) (9) As noted above, this addresses the local association and global estimation problems simulta-neously during estimation with the iterated weighted medians. 2 This achieves a breakdown point of 50% over typical graphs, avoids introducing any hyperparameter, does not involve the MAD, and is quite efficient. Like the plug-in estimator, a robust Moran scatterplot can be defined using medians, or using the robust Theil-Sen intercept estimate. This estimator has a few drawbacks, however. Notably, the Theil-Sen estimator scales poorly with both sample size and graph density. While the calculation can be easily vectorised and parallelised (and is thus made amenable to common high performance com-puting patterns) the fundamental scaling limitations are made immediately apparent when      

> 2One might instead argue that an explicit solution to the local association question is never constructed ,since the lag is never computed. However, our definition of the local association problem is the relation between site and surrounding , not the surrounding value itself. This is provided by the slope.

14 conducting permutation inference on the local slopes, which requires a massive number of iterations of the estimator. As 𝑁 becomes truly large ( 𝑁 > 100, 000 ) or graphs be-come dense (as when estimating autocorrelation over non-compact kernels), this simply becomes infeasible. In addition, the local median slope is also not a cross-product, so it differs slightly from the interpretation of the classical Local Moran’s 𝐼 . That said, it is not advised to compare the raw 𝐼 𝑖 statistics directly, since they depend so strongly on the unique topological structure of the graph on which they are estimated; it is more common to convert them into 𝑧 -scores, or to compare local statistics only in terms of quadrant classifications and permutation 𝑝 -values. The Theil-Sen Local Moran admits both. 

# 3.3 Trimmed Least Squares for (Local) Moran Estimation 

Wolf & Kang (2025) acknolwedged these drawbacks, and speculated that the TLS estima-tor (Rousseeuw & Van Driessen 2006) may improve upon the Theil-Sen iterated medians estimator. Therefore, we investigate whether the TLS Moran statistics can provide fast robust local and global indicators of spatial association statistics with similar semantics to the classic Moran statistics. To formalize this approach, the usual TLS problem is defined as an optimization problem to finding 𝛼, 𝛽 that minimize the sum of squared residuals among 𝑁 (1 − 𝑞) retained observations, where 𝑞 is some fraction of the data to be trimmed: minimize  

> 𝛼,𝛽

∑

> 𝑖

(ℎ 𝑖 (𝑦 𝑖 − 𝛼 − 𝑋 𝑖 𝛽)) 

> 2

subject to: 

∑

> 𝑖

ℎ𝑖 ≥ 𝑁 (1 − 𝑞) ℎ𝑖 ∈ 0, 1 

(10) for 𝑁 × 1 response vector 𝑦 , 𝑁 × 𝑝 covariate vector 𝑋 , ℎ𝑖 binary decision variable equal to 1 when 𝑖 is not trimmed, and 𝑞 ∈ [0, 1/2) as the trim fraction. This is a quadratic 15 integer program with a single linear constraint. It is tractable in small data, and heuristic solutions are quite effective in larger data (Rousseeuw & Van Driessen 2006). To extend this to a Moran-form regression, we must re-define the 𝑦 component of the problem as a function of 𝑧 . To help, let us define a re-normalizing lag operator, which adjusts the lag calculation to account for trimmed observations: 

𝑅(𝑧 𝑖 ) = ∑ 

> 𝑗

𝑤 𝑖𝑗 ℎ𝑗 𝑧 𝑗 

∑𝑗 𝑤 𝑖𝑗 ℎ𝑗 

(11) This is the spatial lag at site 𝑖 only among survivors. With this, the TLS Moran optimiza-tion problem is: minimize ∑

> 𝑖

(ℎ 𝑖 (𝑅(𝑧 𝑖 ) − 𝛼 − 𝑧 𝑖 𝛽)) 

> 2

subject to: 

∑

> 𝑖

ℎ𝑖 ≥ 𝑁 𝑞 ℎ𝑖 ∈ 0, 1 

(12) The identified ̂ 𝛼 for this approach represents the robust intercept estimate, and the ̂ 𝐼 𝑇 𝐿𝑆 𝑖 =̂ 𝛽 represents our TLS global indicator of spatial association. Local estimates can then be obtained from ̂ 𝐼 𝑇 𝐿𝑆 𝑖 = 𝑧 𝑖 ∘ 𝑅(𝑧 𝑖 ). The finite sample breakdown point for the TLS global indicator is governed by 𝑞 : if 𝑞 = .5 , then the breakdown point is 50%. The TLS ap-proach is also relatively efficient if there are few outliers, but loses the efficiency as the trimming fraction increases. As a unique strength, the TLS method explicitly identifies a subset of distributional outliers as a side-effect of the estimation. This extends the typical Local Moran quadrant-based classification to include values that would be considered dis-tributional outliers regardless of where in the map they are located. Alternatively, these distributional outliers can be re-contextualized by evaluating the counterfactual: if these were not trimmed, what classification would they be? This is discussed at length in Sec-16 tion 3.3.1. Finding a good trimming fraction ( 𝑞 ) and ultimately estimating the model are also challenging, and our heuristic approaches for doing so are discussed in Section 3.3.2 and Section 3.3.3. 

3.3.1 Conditional Permutation Inference for Robust Local Inference 

The conditional permutation procedure of Ord & Getis (1995) for local statistical inference is a commonly-employed method to conduct inference on local indicators of spatial associ-ation of any form (Sauer et al. 2022). This strategy constructs a pseudo 𝑝 -value at each site 𝑖 by holding 𝑧 𝑖 fixed, randomly exchanging the values of neighbors into the other 𝑛 − 1 

sites, and recomputing the local indicator at 𝑖 . Repeating this 𝑅 times produces a refer-ence distribution at each site, against which the observed local statistic is compared. This approach can be used as is for the plug-in estimators. For the local Theil-Sen indicator, it is important to make sure that we must hold 𝑖 fixed and exchange only 𝑖 ’s neighbors’ values with the rest of the map. Holding 𝑖 fixed and shuffling the entire rest of the map unduly (and erroneously) breaks structure that the Theil-Sen local statistic is sensitive to, through the all-pairs median of medians. The classic Moran statistic is insensitive to quite a few different permutation configurations (Sokal et al. 1998), but the local Theil-Sen is not a Mantel-type crossproduct statistic (Mantel 1967, Hubert et al. 1981). Therefore, it requires shuffling only the neighbors into the rest of the map—shuffling all values except 𝑖 

for inference at 𝑖 results in spurious detections. The simplest way to adapt the permutation inference strategy for TLS-derived indicators is to repeat the TLS estimation during each permutation, whether conditional (site 𝑖 fixed while neighbors are permuted, local null) or total (all sites permuted, global null). However, this presents a few complications. Since trimming decisions take into account the spatial 17 pattern through W𝑧 , the trimmed set may be different in each conditional permutation, as well as identified 𝑞 (if not held fixed). For the global statistic, calculation of pseudo-𝑝 values is straightforward using (𝑀 + 1)/(𝑅 + 1) , where 𝑀 is the count of those equal to or more extreme than the observed statistic. For local statistic, we can either simulate 𝑅 conditional permutations and use only surviving replications to obtain (𝑀 + 1)/(𝑅 ′ + 1) , where 𝑅 ′ is the number of valid (non-trimmed) permutations, or simulate conditional permutations at each site until 𝑅 ′ = 𝑅 .This repeat-survivor approach is simple theoretically, but is exceptionally slow. If we fix the number of replicates per site, then we run a potentially unbounded number of expensive TLS estimations. This will make TLS impractical in all but the smallest of applications. Second, what a “trim” represents is not clear in this framework. Arguably, a site that is trimmed in many null permutations is a site whose local statistic is hard to characterise under the null. The size of the reference distribution under the null (or the number of permutations required to obtain exactly 𝑅 null replicates) is itself informative about the local indicator. Indeed, the repeat-survivor permutation 𝑝 -value implicitly contains two hypotheses: conditional upon 𝑖 not being an outlier, does 𝑖 have null-defying local structure? This null is of dubious relevance to sites that were in fact trimmed. To avoid this massive amount of computation for uncertain benefit, we suggest that a coun-terfactual null for trimmed sites is more appealing. To achieve this, we treat the trimmed set as fixed and shuffle only survivor values for inference. Global and local inference on sur-vivors looks similar to the shuffling part of the repeat-survivor approach, but local inference on trimmed sites is quite different. For trimmed sites, we calculate local statistics under the null using survivor lags [W∗𝑧] 𝑖 . The resulting local permutation distribution allows us to infer the local structure around the site if it had not been trimmed. This allows us to in-18 spect the local association around trimmed observations, while repeat-survivor 𝑝 -values are only reliable if 𝑅 ′ is large. Second, the counterfactual procedure will be much faster than repeating the TLS algorithm for every 𝑁 × 𝑃 local permutation. However, only the repeat-survivor approach represents the uncertainty about which observations enter the trimmed set. Further, it is not immediately clear whether the two techniques are likely to agree, especially in cases where 𝑞 is identified from the data. Therefore, we investigate whether these results lead to substantively different interpretations in our simulation design. 

3.3.2 Solving the trimming problem with C-step estimation 

The structure of Equation 12 is distinct from the classical least-trimmed-squares problem in Equation 10. In the classical TLS problem, 𝑦 and 𝑋 are fixed during solving; changing which observations survive trimming does not alter their 𝑦 or 𝑋 values. In contrast for TLS Moran, response 𝑅(𝑧 𝑖 ) is itself a function of ℎ𝑗 ; dropping observation 𝑗 changes 𝑅(𝑧 𝑖 )

for every 𝑖 that has 𝑗 as a neighbour. This, in turn, changes the residuals of those rows. Hence, Equation 12 is a unique combinatorial problem in which the objective function itself changes as the mask changes. Solving it exactly is intractable except at very small 𝑛 , and a heuristic is needed. We adapt the C-step algorithm of Rousseeuw & Van Driessen (1999; Rousseeuw & Van Driessen 2006), since it is a fast heuristic for the standard LTS problem. Given a current mask 𝐻 (𝑡) , the standard C-step fits OLS on rows in 𝐻 (𝑡) , computes squared residuals for all rows, and selects the ℎ rows with smallest squared residuals to form 

𝐻 (𝑡+1) . The classical result is that the trimmed loss is monotonically non-increasing across iterations, and the algorithm converges in finitely many steps to a local minimum. Multiple random restarts approximate the global optimum. The spatial variant modifies 19 steps (1)–(3) to account for the dependence of the response on 𝐻 :1. Compute the trimmed spatial lag 𝑅(𝑧) from Equation Equation 11 2. Fit OLS of 𝑅(𝑧) on 𝑧 , restricted to rows 𝑖 ∈ 𝐻 (𝑡) with at least one surviving neighbor. 3. Compute squared residuals for all rows 𝑖 with at least one surviving neighbor; 4. Select the ℎ rows with smallest squared residuals to form 𝐻 (𝑡+1) .The classical argument for monotonically-decreasing loss does not carry over to the Moran variant. When an observation enters or exits the trimmed set between iterations, the response variable changes for its neighbours, which in turn changes their residuals; a row that had a small residual at iteration 𝑡 may have a large residual at iteration 𝑡 + 1 even if the regression coefficients do not move much. So the C-step in our setting is a heuristic without a global-convergence guarantee. In practice, we observe convergence in a small number of iterations—typically fewer than ten—for the problem sizes considered here, and we use multiple random starts to mitigate the loss of monotonicity. 

3.3.3 How many observations to trim? 

One additional complication in using trimming in this context is that 𝑞 is a hyperparameter which must be set in advance. Especially in large data, there is no harm in setting 𝑞 = .5 .In this instance, the counterfactual quadrant labels for trimmed observations are likely useful. However, there may be significant topological effects on W from trimming so many observations—we might create many isolates or swaths of the map where no observations are retained. This might make it impossible to apply the counterfactual inference procedure, or may seriously thin the degree distribution such that the variance of local statistics becomes unacceptably large. Therefore, we suggest a simple automatic procedure for identifying suitable 𝑞 . Calculate estimates at the maximum trim ( 𝑞 = .5 obtaining ̂ 𝛽 .5 ) and the 20 minimum trim ( 𝑞 = 0 obtaining the OLS ̂ 𝛽 0). Then, conduct a forward search starting from 𝑞 = 0 for the smallest trimming fraction ̂ 𝑞 , such that trimming ̂ 𝑞 % of the data obtains ̂𝛽 𝑞 within at least ̂ 𝑞 % of ̂ 𝛽 .5 :

|̂𝛽 𝑞 −̂ 𝛽 .5 |̂ 𝛽 .5 

≤̂ 𝑞 

For instance, if trimming 5% of the data obtains 𝛽 within 1% of 𝛽 .5 , we terminate. This represents a search cone anchored at 𝑞 = 0 , providing increasing tolerance for deviation from 𝛽 = .5 as we trim more observations. This is useful for us to find a small ̂ 𝑞 that gets close to the maximally-robust 𝑞 = .5 , but by no means provides a minimal 𝑞 such that distributional outliers are always identified. 

# 4 Simulation Design 

To demonstrate these new techniques, we use a simulation experiment using spatially-patterned random variables with controlled skew and kurtosis. For the latter, we run experiments using a SARTRE distribution, or SAR with 𝑡 -distributed random effects . This process takes a typical SAR random variate and replaces the normally-distributed error with a matrix-𝑡 -distributed error. Define the filter matrix F = (𝐼 − 𝜌 W), then define the SARTRE as: SARTRE (𝜈, 𝜌) = 𝐹 (𝜌) −1 𝑡 𝑛 (𝜈) (13) Here, 𝜌 governs the spatial autocovariance in the process and 𝜈 defines the thinness of tails. As 𝜈 → ∞ , the SARTRE process converges to a classical SAR process. As 𝜈 approaches 

1, the tails of the distribution get heavier. Alternatively, to test skew, we can define a 21 SARLN (𝜎, 𝜌) distribution similarly: SARLN (𝜎, 𝜌) = 𝐹 (𝜌) −1 Lognormal 𝑛 (𝜎) (14) We use these to consider the separate impacts of skew and outlier frequency on these robust local statistics, as well as the classic local statistic. As 𝜎 increases in the SARLN, the right skew increases. As 𝜈 decreases in the SARTRE distribution, kurtosis increases. In the degenerate case of 𝜈 = 1 , the distribution collapses to a Cauchy distribution which has infinite variance. We define a simulation grid for the SARTRE and SARLN processes with 𝜈 ∈ 1, 2, 5 and 

𝜎 ∈ .5, 1.5, 3 . We also include a standard SAR simulation at each 𝜌 /𝑛 to represent 𝜎 → 0 

and 𝜈 → ∞ . We set 𝑛 ∈ 100, 1000, 10000 , and 𝜌 ∈ 0, .25, .5, .75, .95 . We run 99 conditional permutations for the local statistics, and 99 global permutations for the global statistic across two samples sizes, 𝑛 = 100 and 𝑛 = 1000 .Overall, simulations at 𝜌 = 0 allow us to assess statistical size: how frequently does the global statistic identify a trend when one does not exist? Simulations at 𝜌 ≠ 0 allow us to assess statistical power: how frequently does the statistic identify a trend when one does exist? If the power decreases with 𝜎 , the estimator is not robust to skew. If the power decreases with 𝜈 , the estimator is not robust to kurtosis/outliers. We also consider the bias of estimates relative to the classic Moran’s 𝐼 in cases where 𝜎 → 0 /𝜈 → ∞ . The efficiency of estimators is measured in terms of their timing as a function of sample at a given weights matrix sparsity level, and as a function of weights matrix sparsity at a fixed sample size. To illustrate this simulation process, we show a 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1, 𝜌 = .5) example first. Then, we discuss results across all realisations. 22 4.1 Expected Outcomes from Simulations 

Given these processes, we expect the following to happen over simulations from these distributions: 1. at 𝜎 = 0 /𝜈 → ∞ , global statistic estimates will differ. We anticipate the Theil-Sen to be closest to the classical Moran statistic across all simulation configurations. 2. at 𝜌 = 0 , statistics should have appropriate size: 𝑝 values over replicates should be uniform for both local and global statistics, with .05 rejecting the null at a 95 %confidence level. 3. at 𝜌 ≠ 0 , global statistic estimates will differ in power. We expect the Theil-Sen to be the most powerful estimator across all 𝜌 ≠ 0 . We expect the TLS to be next-most efficient, followed by the plug-in for robust global estimators. 4. for increasing 𝜎 and decreasing 𝜈 , we expect the classical Moran to lose power and generate deflated global estimates. 5. as 𝜎 increases in the 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 , we expect more 𝐿𝐿 local statistics for the classical Moran statistic. 6. Theil-Sen local statistics will agree most closely with the plug-in robust local associ-ation measure, and anticipate that the local TLS local statistic is maximally similar to the classical local Moran statistic on average over realizations. 7. Theil-Sen will be the slowest to compute, followed by TLS, plug-in, and then classical Moran. 8. The TLS counterfactual inference procedure will yield similar 𝑝 -values to the repeated-survivor’s conditional 𝑝 -value at substantially lower computational cost. 23 9. Detected 𝑞 for the TLS statistic will be larger when skew is stronger ( 𝜎 is large) and distributional tails are fatter ( 𝜈 is smaller). 

# 5 Results 

To investigate the presence of these models, it helps to first consider a realisation from the simulation set. Then, we present the results from all simulations. Finally, we present the results from a specific application. 

# 5.1 Indicative Simulation Outcome 

To build intuition before turning to the full simulation, Figure 3 shows a single realisation of the 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1.5, 𝜌 = 0.5) process at 𝑛 = 100 . The map of values (panel (a)) is dominated by a handful of large draws from the lognormal tail; because the process is spatially autoregressive, these large values bleed into their neighbours, producing the high-leverage points in the upper-right of the Moran scatterplot (panel (b)). The classical global Moran’s 𝐼 for this realisation is 0.33 , which is the lowest global estimate. The Theil-Sen estiamtor is closest to the classical estimator (.42) , while the TLS is close to 𝜌 (.51 ) in value 3 and plug-in is quite high ( .72 ) relative to other estimates. Figure 4 maps the significant ( 𝑝 ≤ 0.05 ) local clusters for each estimator, and Table 1, Table 2, and Table 3 cross-tabulate the classical cluster assignment against each robust estimator. The Theil-Sen flags the most sites overall (27, against the classical 22 and the TLS 17), while the plug-in is the most conservative here (18). The classical statistic, Theil-Sen, and global plug-in each report a high-high cluster (7, 9, and 7 sites, respectively) with somewhat overlapping geometries. The TLS, however, reports no hotspot/HH clustering.   

> 3We do not expect 𝐸[̂𝐼] = 𝜌 for this process, so this is not necessarily a benefit.

24 Figure 3: (a) One realisation of 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1.5, 𝜌 = 0.5) at 𝑛 = 100 , drawn as choropleth map over Voronoi cells. (b) The corresponding Moran scatterplot, with sites coloured by their classical local-Moran cluster and the OLS slope (global Moran’s 𝐼 ) drawn through the cloud. Instead, the TLS trims 27 of the most extreme values, only one of which occurs in the left (lower) tail. All HH sites detected across the classical, Theil-Sen, or plug-in local statistics are trimmed, except for a single HH plugin site towards the center. All four estimators agree closely on the low-low cluster in the upper-right of the map, but differ at the edges. The Plug-In estimator recovers an LL coldspot as a subset of the classical statistic, while the others do not. The Theil-Sen is the only site that identifies spatial outliers, but it does so in a way that largely comports with visual intuition in the value map. For example, the high-low cluster is larger than all of its neighbors. The TLS procedure trims this observation, but gives it a counterfactual classification as a HL spatial outlier as well. The sole lower-tail distributional outlier in the TLS case is identified as an LH spatial outlier, as in the Theil-Sen case. Thus, there is a broad agreement between the various statistics about cluster cores, but cluster geometries differ on the margins. Further, the Theil-Sen estimator 25 seems more likely to identify spatial outliers, and some of these comport with distributional outliers identified by the TLS technique. The TLS technique, on its own, appears to trim too much, although the counterfactual classification can be used to mitigate the effect of this trimming. Table 1: Classical local-Moran cluster (rows) against the Theil-Sen Moran assignment (columns), single 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1.5, 𝜌 = 0.5) realisation at 𝑛 = 100 .Classic HH LH LL HL NS HH 5 0 0 0 2LH 0 0 0 0 0LL 0 0 10 1 4HL 0 0 0 0 0NS 4 2 5 0 67 Table 2: Classical local-Moran cluster (rows) against the plug-in (GK) Moran assignment (columns), single 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1.5, 𝜌 = 0.5) realisation at 𝑛 = 100 .Classic HH LH LL HL NS HH 4 0 0 0 3LH 0 0 0 0 0LL 0 0 11 0 4HL 0 0 0 0 0NS 3 0 0 0 75 26 Figure 4: Significance-filtered local cluster maps ( 𝑝 ≤ 0.05 ) for the realisation in Figure 3, one Voronoi panel per estimator. TrimHi /TrimLo mark sites the TLS removes as high-leverage before fitting. 27 Table 3: Classical local-Moran cluster (rows) against the TLS Moran assignment (columns), single 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1.5, 𝜌 = 0.5) realisation at 𝑛 = 100 . TrimHi /TrimLo count sites the TLS removes as high-leverage. Classic HH LH LL HL NS TrimHi TrimLo HH 0 0 0 0 0 7 0LH 0 0 0 0 0 0 0LL 0 0 13 0 0 2 0HL 0 0 0 0 0 0 0NS 0 0 4 0 56 17 1The robust Moran scatterplot is visualized below in figure Figure 5. Both the plug-in and Theil-Sen estimators use the same axis structure, while the TLS scatter uses the trimmed mean/trimmed lag mean for axes. Clearly, the strong trimming by the TLS estimator reduces the spread of observations vertically, compressing the structure of the scatterplot. Regardless, we can see that points are at the same locations for the plug-in and Theil-Sen robust Moran scatterplots, but the line (and significance decisions) will differ. Broadly speaking the visual pattern appears most consistent between the left three plots, and the two global estimates for the Theil-Sen and plug-in statistics both appear as defensible estimates of the relationship present in the bulk of the data. 

# 5.2 Overall Simulation Results 

We now present the results across the entire simulation frame, and verify whether the expectations we outline in Section 4.1 hold. 28 Site   

> Surrounding
> Classic
> 22% sig.
> Site
> Theil-Sen
> 27% sig.
> Site
> Plug-in
> 18% sig.
> Site
> TLS ( ̂q= 0.27)
> 17% sig.

Figure 5: Robust Moran scatterplots for each estimator in the same realisation as Figure 4. The axes are drawn with respect to each estimators’ location estimator: means for the classic Moran, medians for the Theil-Sen and Plug-in estimator, and trimmed means for the TLS estimator. Significant sites are coloured by quadrant (HH red, LL blue, LH salmon, HL light blue); non-significant sites are grey. TLS trimmed observations appear at their counterfactual lag position, outlined by trim class (TrimHi purple, TrimLo green) and filled by their Theil-Sen counterfactual class. Five observations in the TLS plot have no neighbors, and must be omitted from the scatterplot because they have no admissible lag. 29 5.2.1 Cluster and outlier classification 

Figure 6 and Table 4 report how each estimator assigns sites to the cluster/outlier quadrants relative to the classical Moran statistic, pooled across 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ). We expect (H5) the classical Moran should label increasingly many sites 𝐿𝐿 as 𝜎 grows in the 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 ,and we do see this in practice. Unfortunately, we do not see any estimator manage to hold the classification distribution constant across skew and kurtosis. All statistics reprise the same LL inflation as the global statistic, as shown in Figure 6, although the plug-in method seems to suppress this the most. The two also tend to get dominated by the outliers as 𝜈 decreases, with fewer and fewer observations retaining their quadrant classifications. Interestingly, the Theil-Sen and Plug-In statistics increase significant classifications as the tails get fatter; the TLS and classical Moran statistics identify fewer significant observations in the outlier regime. This is only partially expected (H6). 

Figure 6: Local classification fractions by skewness, pooled over 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ; 𝑝 ≤ 0.05 , two-sided). 

5.2.2 Estimator agreement 

Figure 7a and Figure 7b show the agreement for the average global estimate across repli-cations for each simulation configuration. The chosen TLS trimming fraction ̂ 𝑞 is also annotated. We can see that all global estimators tend to be larger than the classical 30 (a) 𝑛 = 100  

> (b) 𝑛 = 1000

Figure 7: Global robust estimates against classical Moran’s 𝐼 , faceted by simulation con-figuration; TLS points annotated with the chosen ̂ 𝑞 .31 Moran’s 𝐼 estimate when 𝜌 ≠ 0 . This is expected (H4), but the plug-in estimator is always 

largest for 𝜌 ≠ 0 , which is not anticipated. It seems that this estimator may inflate the estimate of spatial structure present in data, given this structure. Beyond this for the global statistics in Figure 7a and Figure 7b, the Theil-Sen and TLS statistics trade off as closest to the global estimate (H1). 

Figure 8: Bivariate agreement between each pair of local-Moran classifiers, decompos-ing agreement into two components: the fraction of sites given the same significant/non-significant call ( S/NS agreement , red axis) and the chance-corrected agreement (adjusted Rand index) on the 𝐻𝐻/𝐿𝐻/𝐿𝐿/𝐻𝐿 quadrant with no significance filter ( raw-quadrant ARI , blue axis). Red cells mark pairs that agree on whether a site carries signal but not on 

which quadrant; blue cells agree on quadrant but not significance; dark cells agree on both; light cells on neither. Each chroma axis is rescaled to its observed range and discretised into five equal-interval bins (legend, lower right). Each cell pools all sites across 100 reps; rows are skewness scenarios, columns are 𝜌 ; top block 𝑛 = 100 , bottom block 𝑛 = 1000 .In terms of the local statistics, Figure 8 summarises the adjusted Rand index between local statistical estimators for significance decisions and cluster/outlier classifications. There, 32 classifications strongly agree when the 𝜌 is small, but get worse as 𝜌 increases. The plug-in and Theil-sen have higher general agreement across all quadrant configurations, especially in the smaller data, indicated by their stronger blue hues towards the right. The classical and TLS statistics agree most strongly on the significance decisions (and also quadrant decisions), given their generally red or purple hues. Typical trimming fraction does not clearly seem to correspond to experimental configuration: values tend to he higher for small 

𝜌 , but not for larger 𝜎 or smaller 𝜈 (H9). 

5.2.3 Test size 

At 𝜌 = 0 no spatial trend exists, so rejection rates should sit near the nominal 𝛼 = 0.05 and null 𝑝 -values should be uniform (H2). Figure 9 reports global and local rejection rates across the distributional grid, and Figure 10 shows a histogram of the p-values under the null, pooled across all simulations. Under skew, global TLS and plug-in estimators are slightly over-sized, as is the Theil-Sen regressor over moderate skew. However, most worringly, the TLS regression has significant size issues at a few different simulation configurations. This suggests that trimming is too dramatic, and results in seeing spurious spatial patterns in the null after cutting off what may not necessarily be true distributional outliers. Over most of the simulation range, however, the Theil-Sen has great size properties, and maps most closely to the classical Moran statistic for both global and local statistics. 

5.2.4 Power 

For 𝜌 > 0 a trend exists, and power is the rejection rate (H3); robustness to skew and kurtosis means power that does not collapse as 𝜎 grows or 𝜈 shrinks (H4). Figure 11 and Figure 12 trace power across 𝜌 for each distribution at 𝑛 = 100 and 𝑛 = 1000 . From these plots, we can see that the Theil-Sen estimator is the dominating global robust estimator . It 33 (a) Global statistic 

> (b) Local statistic

Figure 9: Rejection rate under 𝐻 0 (𝜌 = 0 ), 100 reps, 𝛼 = 0.05 , pooled over replications among 𝑁 = 100 and 𝑁 = 1000 . The shaded band is the range of rejection rates consistent with a correctly-sized test at 𝛼 = 0.05 , obtained by inverting the exact binomial test at the null-expected count (global: out of 100 replications; local: out of 𝑁 × 100 site-level tests pooled across replications). This interval ignores spatial dependence among local tests and is therefore narrower than the true Monte Carlo variability. 34 Figure 10: Null 𝑝 -value calibration at 𝜌 = 0 , pooled across all distributions at 𝑛 ≤ 1000 .Top row: global pseudo-𝑝 ; bottom row: local pseudo-𝑝 ; one column per estimator. A well-calibrated test is Uniform (0, 1) , i.e. flat at the dashed reference line. has the highest power at any 𝜌 + and acceptable size under the null. This effect is clearest in the small sample. The TLS estimator has a clear size problem, and over-rejects under the null. The global plug-in estimator also behaves well, but is underpowered, especially in small samples. A similar story holds for the local statistics in Figure 12, where the TLS estimator has severe lack of power in heavy-tailed situations ( 𝜈 = 1 ). This is likely because of the trimming removing test hits that other statistics detect as spatial outliers. Again, the Theil-Sen estimator appears to be the most effective global and local estimator. 

5.2.5 Counterfactual vs. repeated C-step TLS inference 

We expect (H8) that the fast counterfactual TLS inference yields 𝑝 -values exceptionally close to the repeated C-step procedure. The correlation of the two local statistics is 1 across all realisations, and the two approaches agree on null rejection decisions at worst 

94.6% of the time ( 𝑛 = 100 with high skew). Thus, if warranted, the fast TLS estimator 35 (a) 𝑛 = 100  

> (b) 𝑛 = 1000

Figure 11: Global rejection rate across 𝜌 , 100 reps, 𝛼 = 0.05 .36 (a) 𝑛 = 100  

> (b) 𝑛 = 1000

Figure 12: Local rejection rate across 𝜌 , 100 reps, 𝛼 = 0.05 .37 with counterfactual inference can be used instead of a full rerun of the TLS algorithm at every local permutation (Table 5). 

5.2.6 Computational performance 

We expect (H7) that Theil-Sen will be the slowest estimator, followed by TLS, then plug-in and classical Moran, which should be substantially the same timing. Figure 13 reports the per-realisation wall-clock cost (estimate plus global and local per-mutation runs) against sample size (Delaunay) and graph density (kNN, 𝑛 = 500 ), at 

𝜌 = 0.5 under 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1.5) . The Theil-Sen conditional local permutation is paral-lelised across sites using 8 threads; all other estimators run single-threaded. The ordering matches H7—Theil-Sen is by far the most expensive, TLS is second, and the plug-in and classical Moran statistics are both cheap—but the gap is severe rather than marginal. At 

𝑛 = 1000 the classical statistic costs 0.6 s, p;lug-in 2.2 s and TLS 7.7 s, while Theil-Sen costs 

38 s, 65× the classical statistic. The conditional local permutation drives this: its cost grows as 𝑂( reps ⋅ perms ⋅ 𝑛 ⋅ 𝑘 2), and the measured density exponent ( 𝑘 2.38 over 𝑘 ∈ {5, 10, 25} )recovers the quadratic-in-𝑘 term. A literal measurement at 𝑘 ∈ {50, 100, 250} would take roughly 23 m, 2h, and 18 h per realisation respectively, so those three density points are reported via the fitted power law and drawn as the dashed, shaded segment in panel (b). 

# 6 Discussion and Conclusion 

Moran-family measures of local association are useful for characterising whether obser-vations are spatial outliers—strikingly different values when compared to other values nearby—or spatial clusters, composed of similar values all on the same side of the dis-tribution. They are doubly useful because they offer a simple visualization, the Moran 38 Figure 13: Per-estimator computational cost ( 𝜌 = 0.5 , 𝑆𝐴𝑅𝐿𝑁 (𝜎 = 1.5) ), as total wall-clock seconds per realisation (estimate plus global and local permutation runs). (a) Cost against sample size 𝑛 on a Delaunay graph. (b) Cost against neighbour count 𝑘 on a 

𝑘 -NN graph at 𝑛 = 500 ; the upper axis shows the implied graph density ( 𝑘/𝑛 ). The 

𝑘 ∈ {50, 100, 250} points (dashed, shaded) are projected from the fitted power law rather than measured. Both axes are logarithmic. 39 Scatterplot, which graphically represents their relation to the global statistic, which mea-sures the spatial association across observations in the whole map. Unfortunately, the classic Moran statistic is sensitive to distributional outliers , values which are unusual re-gardless of where they are located in the map. This means that the classic statistic used to detect spatial outliers is substantially misled by outliers which are unusual regardless of their location. We argue that this is quite problematic for one of the most commonly-used exploratory spatial data analysis statistics. To mitigate this issue, we cover a variety of robust estimation techniques for Moran-style local and global measures of spatial association. We find (H1) that the Theil-Sen and TLS global estimator trade off as most similar to the classical global estimate over simulations, while the global plug-in estimator significantly over-states the magnitude of association. (H2) Unexpectedly, TLS estimators tend to be too large under the null, while TLS statistics and plug-in estimators tend to be more appropriately sized, however 𝑝 -values are practically uniform for all estimators. (H3) As expected, the Theil-Sen estimator is indeed the most powerful statistic across all cases, but the plug-in estimators obtain similar power in larger data. (H4) We do find evidence that the Moran statistic is understated globally under conditions of high skew, and proportions of opposite-tail outliers tend to increase (H5). We find that the (H6) Theil-Sen and plug-in statistics agree significantly on the local estimates, and find that the TLS local statistics are most similar to the classical Moran statistics. In terms of speed, (H7) Theil-sen is unexpectedly fast in small data, but our anticipated speed ranking is recovered by 𝑛 = 1000 . Despite the serious drawbacks identified for the TLS estimator, we do find that (H8) the counterfactual inference strategy yields substantially the same results as the significantly more expensive repeated-survivor inference strategy, while trim fraction (H9) only seems to decline clearly with spatial patterning, not tail 40 thickness or skew strength. Synthesizing these findings overall, we suggest that the Theil-Sen estimator is powerful, efficient, and fast enough for common use in moderately-sized samples. Given the compu-tational intensity for this technique, we think that the TLS estimator is unlikely to yield useful or tractable estimators going forward. The TLS estimator has significant size and power issues in precisely the situations it must be most useful: high skew, fat distributional tails, as well as under no patterning. Beyond this, the robust plug-in estimator of Arbia & Nardelli (2025) also achieves reasonable power and robustness to skew and distributional outliers in large data. Fortunately, the plug-in and Theil-Sen estimators share the same po-sitions and axes within the Robust Moran Scatterplot and ultimately provide very similar local estimates. The two do differ on the strength of global patterning, however, with the plug-in estimator seeming to over-state the magnitude of map patterning. Between these two estimators, the Theil-Sen estimator should be used if the computational cost can be paid, since it has the the best combination of power, size, and sensitivity to spatial outliers; if it cannot, the plug-in estimators can be used. More generally, these should be provide new “default” estimators for generating local indicators of spatial association. 

# 7 Appendix 

41 Table 4: Quadrant crosstabs: classical Moran quadrant (rows) against each robust estima-tor’s assignment, row-normalised so each classical quadrant sums to 100% across the robust labels. By skewness, pooled over 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ). TrimHi /TrimLo give the share of those sites the TLS removes as distributional outliers. skewness estimator classic HH LH LL HL TrimHi TrimLo normal Theil-Sen HH 90% 1% 0% 9% LH 1% 82% 16% 0% LL 0% 9% 90% 1% HL 16% 0% 1% 82% —TLS HH 93% 0% 0% 7% 1% 0% LH 0% 87% 12% 0% 0% 1% LL 0% 6% 93% 0% 0% 1% HL 12% 0% 0% 87% 1% 0% —Plug-in HH 90% 1% 0% 9% LH 1% 82% 16% 0% LL 0% 9% 90% 1% HL 16% 0% 1% 82% —LN(0,0.5) Theil-Sen HH 92% 0% 0% 8% LH 18% 66% 13% 3% LL 2% 12% 78% 8% 42 Table 4: Quadrant crosstabs: classical Moran quadrant (rows) against each robust estima-tor’s assignment, row-normalised so each classical quadrant sums to 100% across the robust labels. By skewness, pooled over 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ). TrimHi /TrimLo give the share of those sites the TLS removes as distributional outliers. skewness estimator classic HH LH LL HL TrimHi TrimLo HL 24% 0% 0% 76% —TLS HH 90% 0% 0% 9% 1% 0% LH 0% 81% 18% 0% 0% 1% LL 0% 10% 89% 0% 0% 0% HL 21% 0% 0% 78% 1% 0% —Plug-in HH 92% 0% 0% 8% LH 18% 66% 13% 3% LL 2% 12% 78% 8% HL 24% 0% 0% 76% —LN(0,1.5) Theil-Sen HH 96% 0% 0% 4% LH 52% 32% 9% 7% LL 9% 16% 63% 12% HL 46% 0% 0% 54% —TLS HH 82% 0% 0% 15% 2% 0% 43 Table 4: Quadrant crosstabs: classical Moran quadrant (rows) against each robust estima-tor’s assignment, row-normalised so each classical quadrant sums to 100% across the robust labels. By skewness, pooled over 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ). TrimHi /TrimLo give the share of those sites the TLS removes as distributional outliers. skewness estimator classic HH LH LL HL TrimHi TrimLo LH 0% 52% 47% 0% 1% 1% LL 0% 13% 87% 0% 0% 0% HL 31% 0% 0% 68% 1% 0% —Plug-in HH 96% 0% 0% 4% LH 52% 32% 9% 7% LL 9% 16% 63% 12% HL 46% 0% 0% 54% —LN(0,3.0) Theil-Sen HH 99% 0% 0% 1% LH 75% 14% 5% 6% LL 24% 12% 52% 11% HL 72% 0% 0% 28% —TLS HH 84% 0% 0% 11% 5% 0% LH 0% 45% 54% 0% 1% 0% LL 0% 8% 92% 0% 0% 0% HL 21% 0% 0% 78% 1% 0% 44 Table 4: Quadrant crosstabs: classical Moran quadrant (rows) against each robust estima-tor’s assignment, row-normalised so each classical quadrant sums to 100% across the robust labels. By skewness, pooled over 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ). TrimHi /TrimLo give the share of those sites the TLS removes as distributional outliers. skewness estimator classic HH LH LL HL TrimHi TrimLo —Plug-in HH 99% 0% 0% 1% LH 75% 14% 5% 6% LL 24% 12% 52% 11% HL 72% 0% 0% 28% —

𝑡 5 Theil-Sen HH 89% 1% 0% 10% LH 2% 80% 18% 0% LL 0% 10% 89% 1% HL 18% 0% 1% 80% —TLS HH 93% 0% 0% 7% 1% 0% LH 0% 86% 14% 0% 0% 1% LL 0% 7% 93% 0% 0% 1% HL 14% 0% 0% 86% 1% 0% —Plug-in HH 89% 1% 0% 10% LH 2% 80% 18% 0% 45 Table 4: Quadrant crosstabs: classical Moran quadrant (rows) against each robust estima-tor’s assignment, row-normalised so each classical quadrant sums to 100% across the robust labels. By skewness, pooled over 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ). TrimHi /TrimLo give the share of those sites the TLS removes as distributional outliers. skewness estimator classic HH LH LL HL TrimHi TrimLo LL 0% 10% 89% 1% HL 18% 0% 1% 80% —

𝑡 2 Theil-Sen HH 87% 2% 1% 10% LH 4% 74% 21% 1% LL 1% 10% 87% 2% HL 21% 1% 4% 75% —TLS HH 91% 0% 0% 8% 1% 0% LH 0% 82% 17% 0% 0% 1% LL 0% 8% 91% 0% 0% 1% HL 16% 0% 0% 83% 1% 0% —Plug-in HH 87% 2% 1% 10% LH 4% 74% 21% 1% LL 1% 10% 87% 2% HL 21% 1% 4% 75% —46 Table 4: Quadrant crosstabs: classical Moran quadrant (rows) against each robust estima-tor’s assignment, row-normalised so each classical quadrant sums to 100% across the robust labels. By skewness, pooled over 𝜌 and 𝑛 (𝑛 ≤ 1000 ). TrimHi /TrimLo give the share of those sites the TLS removes as distributional outliers. skewness estimator classic HH LH LL HL TrimHi TrimLo 

𝑡 1 Theil-Sen HH 67% 8% 13% 11% LH 20% 50% 27% 3% LL 14% 11% 67% 8% HL 29% 2% 18% 50% —TLS HH 87% 0% 0% 13% 1% 0% LH 0% 76% 23% 0% 0% 1% LL 0% 12% 87% 0% 0% 1% HL 23% 0% 0% 76% 1% 0% —Plug-in HH 67% 8% 13% 11% LH 20% 50% 27% 3% LL 14% 11% 67% 8% HL 29% 2% 18% 50% 47 Table 5: Agreement between counterfactual and full C-step TLS local inference, by dis-tribution and 𝑛 (subset: all sites). 𝑟 𝑝 : Pearson correlation of pseudo-𝑝 -values; MAD( 𝑝 ): mean absolute difference; agreement: fraction of sites with identical rejection decisions at 

𝛼 = 0.05 .distribution 𝑛 𝑟 𝑝 MAD( 𝑝 ) agreement LN(0,0.5) 100 0.965 0.049 96.6% LN(0,1.5) 100 0.928 0.068 95.1% LN(0,3.0) 100 0.919 0.068 94.6% normal 100 0.969 0.047 96.6% 

𝑡 1 100 0.966 0.048 97.8% 

𝑡 2 100 0.97 0.045 97.3% 

𝑡 5 100 0.97 0.046 96.8% LN(0,0.5) 1000 0.974 0.044 96.0% LN(0,1.5) 1000 0.897 0.082 95.4% LN(0,3.0) 1000 0.942 0.055 97.4% normal 1000 0.977 0.041 96.2% 

𝑡 1 1000 0.984 0.033 98.9% 

𝑡 2 1000 0.98 0.039 97.8% 

𝑡 5 1000 0.978 0.04 96.8% 

# References 

Anselin, L. (1988), Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models , Studies in Operational Regional Science, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 48 Anselin, L. (1995), ‘Local indicators of spatial association-LISA’, Geographical Analysis 

27 (2), 93–115. Anselin, L. (1996), The Moran scatterplot as an exploratory spatial data analysis tool to assess local instability in spatial association, in M. M. Fischer, H. J. Scholten & D. Unwin, eds, ‘Environmental Modeling with GIS’, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 454–469. Anselin, L. (2019), ‘A Local indicator of Multivariate Association: Extending Geary’s c.’, 

Geographical Analysis 51 (2), 133–150. Arbia, G. & Nardelli, V. (2025), ‘A robust spatial correlation analysis for a better under-standing of John Snow ghost map’, Letters in Spatial and Resource Sciences 18 (1), 15. Arbia, G. & Nardelli, V. (2026), ‘The impact of spatial outliers on spatial correlation: The role of the local influence function’, Journal of Geographical Systems 28 (1), 7–25. Berglund, S. & Karlstrøm, A. (1999), ‘Identifying local spatial association in flow data’, 

Journal of Geographical Systems 1(3), 219–236. Bjornstad, O. N. & Falck, W. (2001), ‘Nonparametric spatial covariance functions: Esti-mation and testing’, Environmental and Ecological Statistics 8, 53–70. Cliff, A. D. & Ord, J. K. (1981), Spatial Processes, Models & Applications , Pion, London. Dowd, P. A. (1984), The Variogram and Kriging: Robust and Resistant Estimators, in 

G. Verly, M. David, A. G. Journel & A. Marechal, eds, ‘Geostatistics for Natural Re-sources Characterization’, Springer Netherlands, pp. 91–106. Dray, S. & Jombart, T. (2011), ‘Revisiting guerry’s data: Introducing spatial constraints in multivariate analysis’, The Annals of Applied Statistics 5(4), 2278–2299. 49 Efron, B. & Hastie, T. (2016), Computer Age Statistical Inference , Vol. 5, Cambridge University Press. Genton, M. G. (1998), ‘Highly robust variogram estimation’, Mathematical Geology 

30 (2), 213–221. Getis, A. & Ord, J. K. (1992), ‘The analysis of spatial association by use of distance statistics’, Geographical Analysis 24 (3), 189–206. Getis, A. & Ord, J. K. (1996), Local spatial statistics: An overview, in P. Longley & M. Batty, eds, ‘Spatial Analysis: Modelling in a GIS Environment’, GeoInformation International, Cambridge, pp. 261–277. Gnanadesikan, R. & Kettenring, J. R. (1972), ‘Robust estimates, residuals, and outlier detection with multiresponse data’, Biometrics 28 (1), 81–124. Good, P. (2011), A Practitioner’s Guide to Resampling for Data Analysis, Data Mining, and Modeling , 1 edn, Chapman and Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL. Hubert, L. J., Golledge, R. G. & Costanzo, C. M. (1981), ‘Generalized procedures for evaluating spatial autocorrelation’, 13 (3), 224–233. Juhasz, L. & Mooney, P. (2022), ‘“I Think i Discovered a Military Base in the Middle of the Ocean”—Null Island, the Most Real of Fictional Places’, IEEE Access 10 , 84147–84165. Lee, S.-I. (2001), ‘Developing a bivariate spatial association measure: An integration of Pearson’s r and Moran’s I’, Journal of Geographical Systems 3(4), 369–385. Li, H., Calder, C. A. & Cressie, N. (2007), ‘Beyond Moran’s I: Testing for Spatial Depen-dence Based on the Spatial Autoregressive Model’, Geographical Analysis 39 (4), 357–375. 50 Ma, Y. & Genton, M. G. (2000), ‘Highly Robust Estimation of the Autocovariance Func-tion’, Journal of Time Series Analysis 21 (6), 663–684. Mantel, N. (1967), ‘The detection of disease clustering and a generalized regression ap-proach’, Cancer Res. 27 (2 Part 1), 209–220. Maronna, R. A., Martin, R. D. & Yohai, V. J. (2006), Robust Statistics: Theory and Methods , Wiley, Chichester, UK. Moran, P. A. P. (1948), ‘The interpretation of statistical maps’, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) 10 (2), 243–251. Naimi, B., Hamm, N. A., Groen, T. A., Skidmore, A. K., Toxopeus, A. G. & Alibakhshi, S. (2019), ‘ELSA: Entropy-based local indicator of spatial association’, Spatial Statistics 

29 , 66–88. Nardelli, V. & Salvini, N. (2025), ‘Evaluating the Robustness of Spatial Econometric Esti-mators’, Networks and Spatial Economics .Ord, J. K. (2023), ‘Art getis and local spatial statistics’, Journal of Geographical Systems 

26 (2), 191–200. Ord, J. K. & Getis, A. (1995), ‘Local spatial autocorrelation statistics: Distributional issues and an application’, Geographical Analysis 27 , 286–305. Ord, J. K. & Getis, A. (2012), ‘Local spatial heteroscedasticity (LOSH)’, The Annals of Regional Science 48 (2), 529–539. Rey, S., Fleischmann, M., Noor, W., Winkler, L., Chai, C. P. & Casimiro-Vieyra, E. (2026), ‘Geopandas/geoplanar: V0.6.0’, Software, Zenodo, v0.6.0. Rey, S. J. (2016), ‘Space–time patterns of rank concordance: Local indicators of mobil-51 ity association with application to spatial income inequality dynamics’, Annals of the American Association of Geographers 106 (4), 788–803. Rousseeuw, P. J. & Croux, C. (1993), ‘Alternatives to the Median Absolute Deviation’, 

Journal of the American Statistical Association 88 (424), 1273–1283. Rousseeuw, P. J. & Leroy, A. M. (1987), Robust Regression and Outlier Detection , Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, Wiley, New York. Rousseeuw, P. J. & Van Driessen, K. (1999), ‘A fast algorithm for the minimum covariance determinant estimator’, Technometrics 41 (3), 212–223. Rousseeuw, P. J. & Van Driessen, K. (2006), ‘Computing LTS regression for large data sets’, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 12 (1), 29–45. Sauer, J., Oshan, T. M., Rey, S. J. & Wolf, L. J. (2022), ‘The importance of null hypothe-ses: Understanding differences in local moran’s under heteroskedasticity’, Geographical Analysis 54 (4), 752–768. Simon, J. L. (1999), Resampling: The New Statistics , 2nd ed edn, Resampling Stats. Simon, J. L., Brett, M. & van der Walt, S. (forthcoming), Resampling Statistics , 3rd edition edn, SAGE Publications. Sokal, R. R., Oden, N. L. & Thomson, B. A. (1998), ‘Local spatial autocorrelation in biological variables’, Geographical Analysis 30 (4), 331–354. Sokal, R. R., Oden, N. L., Thomson, B. A. & Kim, J. (1993), ‘Testing for regional differences in means: Distinguishing inherent from spurious spatial autocorrelation by restricted randomization’, Geographical Analysis 25 , 199–210. 52 Tao, R. & Thill, J. (2016), ‘Spatial Cluster Detection in Spatial Flow Data’, Geographical Analysis 48 (4), 355–372. Tiefelsdorf, M. (2002), ‘The saddlepoint approximation of Moran’s I’s and local Moran’s Ii’s reference distributions and their numerical evaluation’, Geographical Analysis 34 (3), 187– 206. Tiefelsdorf, M. & Boots, B. (1995), ‘The exact distribution of Moran’s I’, Environment and Planning A 27 (6), 985–999. Wartenberg, D. (1985), ‘Multivariate spatial correlation: A method for exploratory geo-graphical analysis’, Geographical Analysis 17 (4), 263–283. Waugh, F. V. & Frisch, R. (1933), ‘Partial time regressions as compared with individual trends’, Econometrica 1(4), 387–401. Wolf, L. J. (2024), ‘Confounded local inference: Extending local moran statistics to handle confounding’, Annals of the American Association of Geographers 114 (6), 1216–1231. Wolf, L. J. & Kang, W. (2025), Theil-sen estimation for Moran’s I: A robust representation and estimation approach, in ‘Proceedings of the 33rd GIS Research UK Conference (GISRUK 2025)’. 53